DOI: 10.1002/alz.70048

## REVIEW ARTICLE

<!-- image -->

## Tau degradation in Alzheimer's disease: Mechanisms and therapeutic opportunities

Lisha Wang 1 Banesh Sooram 1 Rajnish Kumar 1,2 Sophia Schedin-Weiss 1

Lars O. Tjernberg 1

Bengt Winblad 1,3

1 Division of Neurogeriatrics, Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society, Karolinska Institutet, Solna, Sweden

2 Department of Pharmaceutical Engineering &amp; Technology, Indian Institute of Technology (BHU), Varanasi, India

3 ThemeInflammation and Aging, Karolinska University Hospital, Huddinge, Sweden

## Correspondence

Lisha Wang and Lars O. Tjernberg, BioClinicum J9:20, Division of Neurogeriatrics, Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society, Karolinska Institutet, 171 64 Solna, Sweden. Email: lars.tjernberg@ki.se and lisha.wang@ki.se

## Funding information

Private Initiative "Innovative ways to fight Alzheimer ´ s disease Leif Lundblad Family and others"; Strategic Research Program in Neuroscience (StratNeuro) funding for postdoctoral researchers at Karolinska Institutet; Stiftelsen för Gamla Tjänarinnor; GunochBertil Stohnes Stiftelse; Åhlén-stiftelsen; Tore Nilsons Stiftelse för Medicinsk Forskning; Hjärnfonden, Grant/Award Number: FO2024-0287-HK-66; Vetenskapsrådet, Grant/Award Number: 2024-03573; Margaretha af Ugglas Foundation; Foundation for Geriatric Diseases at Karolinska Institutet; Karolinska Institutet Research Grants

## 1 INTRODUCTION

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disease that is accountable for around two-thirds of dementia cases in elderly

## Abstract

In Alzheimer's disease (AD), tau undergoes abnormal post-translational modifications and aggregations. Impaired intracellular degradation pathways further exacerbate the accumulation of pathological tau. A new strategy - targeted protein degradation recently emerged as a modality in drug discovery where bifunctional molecules bring the target protein close to the degradation machinery to promote clearance. Since 2016, this strategy has been applied to tau pathologies and attracted broad interest in academia and the pharmaceutical industry. However, a systematic review of recent studies on tau degradation mechanisms is lacking. Here we review tau degradation mechanisms (the ubiquitin-proteasome system and the autophagy-lysosome pathway), their dysfunction in AD, and tau-targeted degraders, such as proteolysistargeting chimeras and autophagy-targeting chimeras. We emphasize the need for a continuous exploration of tau degradation mechanisms and provide a future perspective for developing tau-targeted degraders, encouraging researchers to work on new treatment options for AD patients.

## KEYWORDS

Alzheimer's disease, autophagy, autophagy-targeting chimeras (AUTOTACs), degradation, proteolysis-targeting chimeras (PROTACs), targeted protein degradation, tau, ubiquitin-proteasome system

## Highlights

- Post-translational modifications, aggregation, and mutations affect tau degradation.
- Avicious circle exists between impaired degradation pathways and tau pathologies.
- Ubiquitin plays an important role in complex degradation pathways.
- Tau-targeted degraders provide promising strategies for novel AD treatment.

people. 1 The prevalence of AD is increasing dramatically with aging populations worldwide. 2 The intracellular neurofibrillary tangle (NFT) of tau is one of the main neuropathological hallmarks in AD. 3-5 Tau is a microtubule-associated protein that plays an important role in

This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use is non-commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made. ©2025TheAuthor(s). Alzheimer's &amp; Dementia published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of Alzheimer's Association.

<!-- image -->

physiology, including stabilizing microtubules, regulating axonal transport, and maintaining the integrity of genomic DNA. 6 In AD, tau undergoes abnormal post-translational modifications and forms aggregates, which impairs its normal functions and induces neurotoxicity. 7-11 In addition, the lowered efficiency of degradation pathways in AD further exacerbates the accumulation of pathological tau. Multiple strategies have been applied to ameliorate tau pathology in AD, such as inhibiting tau expression, modulating tau post-translational modifications, inhibiting tau aggregation, and promoting tau degradation. 12,13 Mostof the tau-targeting therapies in clinical trials are immunotherapies, 13,14 but tau antibodies have limited effect intracellularly, where most of thepathologicaltauaccumulates. 15 Analternativestrategyforincreasing tau clearance is targeted protein degradation, 16 which promotes the ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) and the autophagy-lysosome pathway (ALP) for tau degradation. To guide the development of targetedproteindegradationoftau,weneedtounderstandthemechanismsoftaudegradationundernormalandpathologicalconditionsand find suitable target proteins involved in intracellular degradation pathways. Therefore, in this review we summarize the main intracellular tau degradation pathways, UPS and ALP, their mechanisms, crosstalk, key proteins involved in these pathways, and their dysfunction in AD. We discuss all reported small-molecule- and peptide-based tau-targeted degraders, such as proteolysis-targeting chimeras (PROTACs) and autophagy-targeting chimeras (AUTOTACs). Finally, we emphasize the need for the continuous exploration of tau degradation mechanisms and provide a future perspective for the development of tau-targeted degraders in AD.

## 2 TAU DEGRADATION MECHANISMS AND THEIR DYSFUNCTION IN AD

Protein degradation is an important cellular mechanism for protein homeostasis and essential for cell survival but is disrupted in neurodegenerative diseases such as AD. 17 Twomajor pathways - UPS and ALP - mediate intracellular tau degradation, and their dysregulation has been increasingly associated with tau pathology in AD.

## 2.1 Ubiquitin-proteasome system

UPS is a highly conserved intracellular mechanism that maintains protein homeostasis and eliminates damaged, misfolded, and mutated proteins in both the cytoplasm and the nucleus. 18,19 UPS involves two steps: covalent attachment of multiple ubiquitin molecules to the protein substrate and subsequent degradation of the ubiquitinated protein by the proteasome complex. In the first step, the 76amino-acid-long protein ubiquitin is activated by a ubiquitin-activating enzyme (E1) and then transferred to a ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme (E2). Subsequently, the ubiquitin-E2 conjugate interacts with the ubiquitin ligase (E3), which recognizes the protein substrate and mediates the transfer of ubiquitin from E2 to the protein substrate. 20 In the second step, ubiquitinated proteins are transported to the 26S pro-

FIGURE 1 Tau degradation by ubiquitin proteasome system (UPS). Under normal conditions, tau is degraded by the 20S proteasome. After certain post-translational modifications (PTMs), tau is ubiquitinated by series E1/E2/E3 ubiquitin (Ub) transfer processes and delivered to the 26S proteasome for proteolysis into short peptides. Tau oligomers and filamentous aggregates can be disaggregated by the chaperone complex (Hsp70-Hsp110-JDPs) to monomeric tau. The 26S proteasome can also fragment filamentous aggregates and remove soluble oligomers, which is independent of its peptidase activity. Created with BioRender.com.

<!-- image -->

teasome for proteolysis into short peptides. 21 The 26S proteasome is a multicatalytic ATP-dependent protease complex (2.6 MDa) consisting of a cylindrically shaped 20S core particle and one or two 19S regulatory particles that cap the 20S core particle at either one end or both ends. The ubiquitinated proteins can be recognized by intrinsic ubiquitin receptors of the proteasome or shuttle factors, such as p62/SQSTM1, that contain both a ubiquitin-associated domain and a domain that binds to the proteasome. 22

## 2.1.1 Tau degradation by UPS

Tau, as a natively unfolded protein, is degraded by the ATP/ubiquitinindependent 20S proteasome under normal cell conditions 23,24 (Figure 1). When tau undergoes pathological modifications, such as hyperphosphorylation and truncation, it is degraded by the 26S proteasome instead of the 20S proteasome. 25 Hyperphosphorylated tau is ubiquitinated by the E3 ubiquitin ligase CHIP (carboxyl terminus of the Hsc70-interacting protein) together with the E2 ubiquitinconjugating enzyme UbcH5, followed by UPS degradation via the 26S proteasome. 26,27 Tau fragments cleaved by caspase-2 at residues D65 and D421 are preferentially ubiquitinated by CHIP for degradation. 28 TauC3, the product of caspase cleavage at D421 in tau, is known to be a substrate of CHIP, and phosphorylation of TauC3 at a single residue (S416) is sufficient to weaken its interaction with CHIP. 29 Deletion of CHIP in mice leads to the accumulation of hyperphosphorylated tau and caspase-3-cleaved tau species, 30 and overexpression of CHIP promotes the degradation of phosphorylated tau (p-tau). 31,32 Arecent study also showed that CHIP recognized a phosphorylation-dependent degron on tau, 33 although a former study revealed a multidomain dynamic interaction between CHIP and unmodified tau. 34 In addition, tau is a ubiquitinated substrate of other E3 ligases, for instance,

TABLE 1 Dysfunction of tau-targeting E3 ubiquitin ligases and deubiquitinases in AD patients.

| Category             | Proteinname        | DysfunctioninAD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
|----------------------|--------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| E3 ubiquitin ligases | CHIP               | Colocalized with tau lesions. 27 Increased protein levels in ADtemporal cortices. 47 Decreased protein levels in ADhippocampus (Braak III and VI). 48 Nosignificant change in mRNAlevels. 48                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
|                      | TRAF6              | Colocalized with tau and ubiquitin-associating protein sequestosome1/p62 in inclusion bodies isolated from ADhippocampus (Braak VI). 35                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
|                      | Axotrophin/ MARCH7 | Colocalized with NFTs in ADhippocampus (Braak II-VI). 36 Decreased protein levels in cytoplasmic and nuclear fractions obtained from ADtemporal cortex (Braak II-VI). 36                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
|                      | HRD1               | Colocalized with p-tau and its expression levels correlate negatively with p-tau accumulation in hippocampal neurons of AD. 37,49 Increased ratio of hHrd1-positive neurons/astrocytes to total neurons/astrocytesinADhippocampusCA1. 49 Decreased protein levels in soluble fraction, but increased levels in insoluble fraction of cerebral cortex of ADpatients. 50 Increased tendency of mRNAlevels in AD. 50                                                                                    |
|                      | CUL5               | Nonereported.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
|                      | TRIAD3A            | Colocalized with tau amyloid in multiple histological forms in frontal cortex (Braak V-VI). 51 Decreased protein levels in medial frontal and temporal cortex (Braak V-VI). 51                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
| Deubiquitinases      | OTUB1              | Nonereported.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
|                      | USP9               | Decreased expression of gonosomal gene USP9Y (Y-chromosomal form) in male late-onset ADpatients as compared to unaffected male subjects. 40                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
|                      | USP10              | Colocalized with p-tau in cell body of neurons in ADbrain lesions. 52 Increased protein levels in ADhippocampus (Braak IV-VI). 41 Increased gene expression levelsinAD hippocampus (selected samples from GSE5281dataset). 41                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
|                      | USP11              | Increased protein levels in ADfrontal gyrus cortex (Braak IV-VI). 42 Morestrongly associated with tau pathology inwomenthanin men. 42                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
|                      | USP13              | Increased protein levels in ADhippocampus. 43                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
|                      | USP14              | Decreased gene expression level in ADandnegatively correlated with aging. 53                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
|                      | UCH-L1             | Colocalized with p-tau in NFTs. 54 Higher oxidatively modified in ADbrain. 55 Increased protein levels in ADhippocampus. 56 Decreased protein levels in ADfrontal cortex. 55 Decreased protein levels in cerebral cortex (superior frontal gyrus) of patients with late-onset sporadic AD. 57 Decreased soluble protein levels but an increasing trend of insoluble protein levels in ADfrontal cortex. 58 Soluble UCH-L1proteins are inversely proportional to NFTs numbers in ADfrontal cortex. 55 |

tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor 6 (TRAF6), 35 axotrophin/MARCH7, 36 HRD1 (endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation)-associated ubiquitin ligase, 37 and Cullin-RING ligase CUL5 (which binds tau via adaptor protein SOCS4) 38 (Table 1). Meanwhile, ubiquitin molecules from ubiquitinated tau can be removed by deubiquitinating enzymes known as deubiquitinases (DUBs), such as ovarian-tumor domain cysteine protease DUB (OTUB1), 39 ubiquitinspecific protease (USP) 9, 40 USP10, 41 USP11, 42 USP13, 43 USP14, 44,45 and ubiquitin carboxy-terminal hydrolase L1 (UCH-L1) 46 (Table 1).

Interestingly, Ye et al. performed in vitro assays showing that the 26S proteasome can remove soluble oligomers assembled from the monoubiquitinated tau aggregation domain (Tau K18 ) primarily by enabling their dissociation independent of its peptidase activity. 59 They also showed that full-length tau filamentous aggregates (up to ∼ 20 µm in length) are substrates of the 26S proteasome, which frag- ments them into small aggregates depending on proteasomal ATPase - but not proteolytic - activity. 60 These results amend the former view of proteasomes that can only target non-aggregated proteins. 61 Other indirect evidence comes from the development of PROTACs (summarized in Section 3), which are hetero-bifunctional molecules that bring the E3 ligase close to the protein of interest for ubiquitination. Silva et al. showed that their PROTACs (eg, QC-01-175) could reduce soluble and insoluble tau species in a UPS-dependent manner. 62,63 An intermediate step might be involved before the 26S proteasome degradation of tau aggregates as follows: disaggregation of ubiquitinated tau aggregates by chaperone Hsp70-Hsp110-JDPs (J domainproteins) complex. 64 However, this disaggregation step has not been investigated in their reported research. Taken together, the exact mechanism of tau degradation by UPS is still uncertain and requires further comprehensive investigations.

## 2.1.2 UPS dysfunction in AD

In human AD brains, there is a global increase of tau ubiquitylation. A total of 28 ubiquitylation sites have been identified for tau in AD brains, mainly located on its proline-rich domain and microtubulebinding region. 65,66 K6-, K11-, K48-, and K63-linked as well as linear (head-to-tail) polyubiquitin chains have been verified in paired helical filaments (PHFs) or NFTs. 67,68 In AD, tau-targeting E3 ligases and DUBs have been reported to be either upregulated 41,47,49 or downregulated, 48,50,55 and some of them are reported to colocalize with AD tau pathology (Table 1). For example, CHIP colocalizes with tau lesions in human patients with tauopathy, including AD. 27 Sahara et al. reported increased CHIP levels in the temporal cortices of human AD brains, and CHIP protein expression levels were inversely proportional to sarkosyl-insoluble PHF-tau levels. They suggested that increases in CHIP may protect against NFT formation at the early stage of AD. 47 Later, Ravalin et al. observed a striking loss in CHIP expression in the hippocampus of human AD tissue at Braak stages III and VI, representing AD middle and late stages, respectively. They also analyzed RNA sequencing data from the Allen Brain Atlas revealing that CHIP mRNA did not significantly change, suggesting that the observed loss of CHIP occurs post-transcriptionally. 48 Another E3 ligase, HRD1, colocalizes with p-tau, and its expression levels correlate negatively with p-tau accumulation in the hippocampal neurons of AD. 37,49 The ratio of hHrd1-positive neurons/astrocytes to total neurons/astrocytes is increased in the CA1 subfield in AD hippocampus compared with the age-matched controls. 49 In the cerebral cortex of AD patients, HRD1 protein levels in the 1% NP-40 detergentsoluble fraction were significantly decreased, 50 whereas they were increased in the insoluble fraction. 69 In addition, HRD1 mRNA showed a tendency to increase in AD compared with controls. 50 The DUB UCH-L1 colocalizes with hyperphosphorylated tau in NFTs 54 and is oxidatively modified in the AD brain. 55 UCH-L1 protein levels are significantly increased in the human AD hippocampus (1.31-fold) 56 but decreased in AD frontal cortex. 55 Specifically, there is a significant decrease in soluble UCH-L1 protein levels but an increasing trend of insoluble UCH-L1 levels in AD frontal cortex, 58 and soluble UCH-L1 protein levels are inversely proportional to NFTs numbers in AD frontal cortex. 55 A recent study also reported that UCH-L1 protein levels decreased in the cerebral cortex (superior frontal gyrus) of patients with late-onset sporadic AD. 57 Therefore, in different brain regions and stages of AD, the regulation of UPS might be different, and it is crucial to investigate whether these changes are due to gene expression, protein degradation, or aggregation.

In addition, proteasome activity is significantly impaired in human ADbrains (Braak stage VI), especially in the hippocampus and parahippocampal gyrus, 70 and straight gyrus. 71 However, this loss of proteasome activity is not associated with a decrease in proteasome protein expression, which suggests that the proteasome may be inhibited in AD by a post-translational modification. 70 Importantly, PHF isolated from AD brains and tau oligomers can inhibit proteasome activity. 71,72 In summary, UPS dysfunction leads to abnormal accumulation of tau, while pathological tau impairs UPS, forming a vicious circle for disease progression.

## 2.2 Autophagy-lysosome pathway

ALP is another important degradation mechanism that mediates the delivery of intracellular cytosolic components to lysosomes for degradation and recycling. It includes three major types, as follows: macroautophagy, microautophagy, and chaperone-mediated autophagy (CMA). 73 Macroautophagy is the most prevalent form, and during this process the cell forms a double-membrane sequestering compartment termed the phagophore, which matures into an autophagosome with intracellular material (eg, proteins and organelles) inside, and is then delivered to lysosomes for degradation. 74 Macroautophagy is inhibited by the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) and triggered by activation of adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase (AMPK). 75 In microautophagy, cytoplasmic material is directly taken up by lysosomes and late endosomes by membrane protrusion and invagination. 76 In CMA, lysine-phenylalanine-glutamate-arginine-glutamine (KFERQ)-like motif-bearing proteins in complex with the chaperone heat shock cognate protein of 70 kDa (HSC 70) and co-chaperones are delivered to the lysosome surface and internalized into the lysosome through a multimeric complex of lysosome-associated membrane protein 2A (LAMP2A) for degradation. 77

## 2.2.1 Tau degradation by ALP

Tau can be degraded by all three types of ALP (Figure 2). Selective macroautophagy can recognize protein aggregates and mediate their degradation, which is called 'aggrephagy.' 78 In aggrephagy, ubiquitinated tau is recognized by autophagy cargo receptors, such as p62/SQSTM1 (sequestosome1), 79,80 OPTN (optineurin), 80,81 NDP52/CALCOCO2 (nuclear domain 10 protein 52, calcium binding and coiled-coil domain 2), 82 NBR1 (neighbor of breast cancer 1 gene), 83 CCDC50 (coiled-coil domain containing 50), 84 and TAX1BP1 (trans-activating transcriptional regulatory protein of HTLV-1 [TAX1] binding protein 1). 85 These receptors contain not only a ubiquitinassociated domain to recognize ubiquitin chains on protein aggregates, but also an LC3-interacting region allowing for the binding of LC3 on the phagophore membrane, thereby allowing the recruitment of these protein aggregates to phagophores, eventually leading to degradation by the lysosome. Specifically, these autophagy cargo receptors target different forms of tau species in different conditions. The knocking out of p62/SQSTM1 in P301S mutant tau transgenic mice (line PS19) causes a significant accumulation of tau oligomers, suggesting the requirement of p62 to eliminate disease-related oligomeric tau species. 79 However, another study reported that p62/SQSTM1 predominantly degraded insoluble, but not soluble, mutant tau (P301L) in a seeding-based cellular assay and that overexpression of

(A) Macroautophagy (Aggrephagy)

<!-- image -->

FIGURE 2 Tau degradation by the autophagy-lysosomal pathway (ALP). ALP includes three major types: macroautophagy, chaperone-mediated autophagy (CMA), and microautophagy. (A) In one of the selective macroautophagy pathways (aggrephagy), ubiquitinated tau is recognized by autophagy cargo receptors, which can bind to LC3 on the phagophore membrane. This leads to the recruitment of tau to phagophores, followed by degradation in the lysosome. (B) In CMA, KFERQ-like motifs of tau are recognized by the HSC70 chaperone complex, delivered to the lysosomal surface, and internalized into the lysosome through a multimeric complex of lysosome-associated membrane protein 2A(LAMP2A)for degradation. (C) In selective endosomal microautophagy (eMI), KFERQ-like motifs of tau are recognized by the HSC70 chaperone complex, which can bind to the endosomal membrane via electrostatic interactions. The late endosomal membrane invaginates and sequesters tau into small microvesicles. Late endosomes can degrade tau directly in the endosomal lumen or upon fusion with autophagosomes/lysosomes. Created with BioRender.com.

<!-- image -->

p62/SQSTM1significantly reduced insoluble tau pathology in rTg4510 mice (Tau P301L). 80 OPTN primarily targets soluble endogenous WT tau expressed in physiological conditions, and OPTN expression can eliminate soluble and insoluble fractions of mutant tau (P301L) in cells 80 and reduce p-tau levels and improve learning and memory in mutant tau (P301L) expressing mice. 81 NDP52/CALCOCO2 overexpression facilitates the clearance of endogenous p-tau (Ser262/Ser356 and Ser396/Ser404) in primary cortical neurons. 82 A recent study revealed that the specificity of autophagy cargo receptors in targeting different tau species can be regulated: co-chaperone BAG3 promotes p62/SQSTM1 binding to oligomeric tau and inhibits its binding to monomeric tau, while BAG3 promotes NBR1 binding with the monomeric form of tau, which is disrupted in the absence of BAG3. 83 In the presence of p62/SQSTM1 and NBR1, TAX1BP can be recruited to monomeric ubiquitylated K63-enriched tau but not efficiently recruited to tau fibrils extracted from AD brains. 85 This lack of recruitment is due to the saturation of ubiquitin marks on fibrillar tau by p62/SQSTM1andNBR1.Inaddition,therealsoexist other kinds of autophagy cargo receptors, such as CCT2 (chaperonin-containing

TCP1 subunit 2), that promote autophagosome incorporation and clearance of mutant Tau P301L aggregates by interacting with both LC3 and tau, independent of tau ubiquitination. 86

Tau is also a substrate of CMA and selective endosomal microautophagy (eMI), both of which require a KFERQ-like motif recognized by the HSC70 chaperone. Tau contains two such motifs in its Cterminal region: 336 QVEVK 340 and 347 KDRVQ 351 . 87 CMA and eMI efficiently degrade WT-unmodified tau monomer (hTau40), but tau mutations (A152T or P301L) or phosphorylation can reduce the degradation by CMA and eMI. 88 Under certain conditions, tau degradation can be rerouted from one type of autophagy to another. For example, tau mutation A152T blocks the degradation of tau by eMI, favors its rerouting toward macroautophagy degradation, and has a mild inhibitory effect on its degradation by CMA. 88 Tau acetylation has an inhibitory effect on CMA activity and reroutes tau degradation from CMA to macroautophagy and eMI. 89 Experimental CMA blockage favors rerouting of monomer and oligomers of acetylated tau toward late endosomes/multivesicular bodies by eMI, which could lead to extracellular release and cell-to-cell propagation of tau. 89

<!-- image -->

TABLE 2 Dysfunction of tau-targeting autophagy cargo receptors in AD patients.

| Proteinname    | DysfunctioninAD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
|----------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| p62/SQSTM1     | Colocalized with NFTs in ADparietal cortex (Braak stages VandVI). 101 Colocalized with p-tauandA β in ADtemporal cortex. 102 Decreased protein levels in ADfrontal cortex (Braak stages IV and VI). 103 Increased protein levels in ADtemporal cortex. 102,104,105 |
| OPTN           | Not colocalized with tau inclusions. 106 Adecreasing trend of protein levels in ADtemporal lobe cortex. 106 Progressively increased accumulation in aggresomes in ADhippocampus(fromBraakIII/IV to Braak VI). 107                                                  |
| NDP52/CALCOCO2 | Associate with p-tau (Ser262/Ser356 [12E8] or a Ser396/Ser404 [PHF1]) in the ADcerebral cortex. 82 Inversely proportional to p-tau in insoluble fractions. 82                                                                                                      |
| NBR1           | Nochanges in total brain homogenates from AD. 108 Reduced protein levels in neurons and microglia, but increased protein levels in astrocytesinAD hippocampus (Braak III and IV). 108                                                                              |
| CCDC50         | Nonereported.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| TAX1BP1        | Noimmunoreactivity for TAX1BP1inNFTsinADhippocampusbyimmunohistochemistry. 85                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| CCT2           | Decreased gene expression levels in ADprefrontal cortex (GSE33000 database). 109                                                                                                                                                                                   |

## 2.2.2 ALP dysfunction in AD

Accumulating evidence shows that ALP is impaired in AD. 90,91 Autophagosomes and other prelysosomal autophagic vacuoles are massively accumulated in neocortical biopsies from human AD brains as observed by electron microscopy. 92 This accumulation in AD is due to transcriptional upregulation of autophagy and impaired clearance of autophagic vacuoles. 93-95 In neurons, autophagosomes are continuously generated at the distal ends of axons and dendrites and need to be transported retrogradely long distances to fuse with lysosomes near the cell body for degradation. In AD, the maturation of autophagolysosomes and their retrograde transport are impeded, which also leads to massive accumulation of autophagic vacuoles within impaired neurites. 96 CMA downregulation was revealed by analysis of a single-nucleus RNA sequencing dataset in the prefrontal cortex of AD patients. 97 This CMA inhibition starts early in AD, becomes more severe at later disease stages, and is cell-type specific: It only appears in excitatory and inhibitory neurons, not in astrocytes, microglia, and oligodendrocytes. 97 In addition, there are several gene mutations involved in the impairment of autophagy and lysosome function in both early-onset familial AD and late-onset AD, such as presenilin 1 ( PSEN1 ), presenilin 2 ( PSEN2 ), and phosphatidylinositol binding clathrin assembly protein ( PICALM ) (summarized in Zhang et al. 98 ). Tau pathology is also closely related to this impairment of ALP in AD. Pathological tau causes dysfunction of autophagy and lysosomes, 98,99 while dysfunction of ALP results in the formation of tau oligomers and insoluble aggregates, 100 which exacerbates disease progression.

Autophagy cargo receptors are involved in tau pathology in AD (Table 2). For example, p62/SQSTM1 has been found to colocalize with NFTs in the parietal cortex of AD patients (Braak stages V and VI) 101 andwithp-tauandamyloid β -peptide (A β ) in the temporal cortex of human AD brain. 102 In the middle and late stages of AD individuals (Braak stages IV and VI), the expression of p62 was decreased in the frontal cortex relative to age-matched controls and correlated with increased oxidative damage to p62 DNA promoter. 103 In the temporal cortex, increased p62 protein levels are found in AD compared to controls. 102,104,105 In AD brains, OPTN-positive neuronal and glial cytoplasmic inclusions appear in areas severely affected by AD-type tau pathology. However, double immunofluorescence labeling did not show colocalization of the rare OPTN inclusions with the more frequent tau inclusions. 106 In post mortem hippocampal tissues, the accumulation of OPTN in histone deacetylase 6-positive aggresomes progressively increases from AD Braak stages III/IV to Braak stage VI. 107 Co-immunoprecipitation studies show that NDP52 associates with p-tau (Ser262/Ser356 [12E8] or a Ser396/Ser404 [PHF1]) from AD cerebral cortical samples, and the amount of ptau in sarkosyl-insoluble fractions is inversely proportional to that of NDP52. 82 The NBR1 protein and mRNA expressions are not altered in total brain homogenates from AD human patients compared to healthy controls. 108 However, NBR1 protein levels are significantly reduced in neurons and microglia, particularly in regions with intense A β deposition, but increased in astrocytes in the hippocampus of AD brains (Braak stages III and IV). 108 Therefore, in human AD brains, the dysregulation of autophagy cargo receptors may differ between brain regions and even between different cell types in the same area. Still, further comprehensive studies are needed to provide a clear understanding of ADpathology related to autophagy.

## 2.3 Crosstalk between UPS and ALP

Multiple lines of evidence show that crosstalk exists between UPS and ALP. The initial observation of their connection was the compensatory balance between the activities of UPS and ALP. 110 For instance, inhibition of the UPS by proteasome inhibitors results in compensatory activation of the ALP in cultured primary neurons, with a subsequent increase in tau degradation. 111,112 Underlying their crosstalk for tau

degradation, ubiquitin plays an important role in the molecular mechanism: Both systems target ubiquitinated tau and share a common ubiquitin receptor for delivery.

Ubiquitinated tau can be degraded by either the 26S proteasome or aggrephagy, an important selective variant of macroautophagy, depending on which type of ubiquitin chain linkage occurs. The ubiquitin sequence contains seven lysine residues (at positions 6, 11, 27, 29, 33, 48, and 63), and polyubiquitin chain assembly can occur by covalent bonds between the C-terminus of one ubiquitin and any one of the seven lysine residues or the N-terminus of the adjacent ubiquitin. 113 ThepredominantpolyubiquitinconjugationisK48-linkedchains,which target proteins to the proteasome for degradation. 114 Another common polyubiquitin conjugation is K63-linked chains, which regulate proteasome-independent pathways, such as ALP. 115 In addition to polyubiquitination, monoubiquitination, conjugation of a single ubiquitin molecule to the substrate's protein amino group or multiple amino groups, is another important signal for proteasomal degradation. 116 Tan et al. showed that K48- and K63-linked polyubiquitination, as well as monoubiquitin modification, contributed to the biogenesis of tau inclusions, but only K63 ubiquitin-modified tau inclusions were preferentially cleared by autophagy. 117 K63-linked ubiquitination is also associated with enhanced seeding activity and propagation of pathological tau. 118 TheE3ligase CHIP can ubiquitinate tau by forming K48and K63-linked ubiquitin chains. 27 The ability of CHIP to form different ubiquitin linkages depends on its E2 partners: CHIP forms specific K63-linked chains using Ubc13-Uev1a as its E2, but when CHIP is paired with E2 UbcH5a, it forms either K63- or K48-linked chains. 119 Tau is also a K63-polyubiquitinated substrate of TRAF6, another E3 ligase targeting tau. 35 Interestingly, a recent study revealed that E3 ligase TRIAD3A catalyzes mixed K11/K63 polyubiquitin chains and self-assembles into liquid-liquid phase separated droplets. 51 Tau is ubiquitinated and converted into fibrillar aggregates within TRIAD3A droplets, which interact with LC3 to deliver the complex to autophagosomes for autophagic degradation. Regarding tau monoubiquitylation, E3 ligase axotrophin/MARCH7 monoubiquitinates tau at multiple sites including the microtubule-binding domain, 36 and E2 UBE2W monoubiquitinates the N-terminus of Tau K18 . 59 Therefore, under various circumstances, tau can be ubiquitinated by different enzymes, forming distinct ubiquitin linkages that encode the degradation pathway.

The most studied ubiquitin receptor is p62/SQSTM1, which is not only the shuttle factor for UPS but also the autophagy cargo receptor for ALP. p62/SQSTM1 can bind to ubiquitinated proteins via its C-terminal ubiquitin-associated domain, to the proteasome via its Nterminal Phox-BEM1 domain, and to autophagic membranes via its LC3-interacting region. 22 Studies show that the UPS/ALP choice is determined by the oligomeric state of ubiquitin receptors, rather than their ubiquitin-binding properties. 120 The p62/SQSTM1 dimers recognize ubiquitinated proteins and shuttle them to the proteasome for UPS degradation, whereas higher-order oligomers of p62/SQSTM1 take up ubiquitinated proteins in the form of p62/SQSTM1 bodies that subsequently recruit autophagic membranes for ALP (reviewed in Pohl and Dikic 121 ). Regarding tau degradation, Babu et al. 35 found that polyubiquitinated tau interacts with the ubiquitin-associated domain of p62/SQSTM1 and that tau fails to interact with the proteasome in brain lysates of p62/SQSTM1 knockout mice, indicating a requirement for p62/SQSTM1 shuttling of tau to the proteasome. Falcon et al. showed that p62/SQSTM1 targeted seeded tau aggregates for ALP degradation in cells overexpressing Tau P301S treated with DyLight-labeled aggregated Tau P301S. 122 In animal models, genetic inactivation of p62/SQSTM1 leads to the accumulation of hyperphosphorylated tau, 79,123 and overexpression of p62/SQSTM1 in tau transgenic mouse (rTg4510) brains ameliorates tau pathology. 80 In the brains of AD patients, p62/SQSTM1 is colocalized with pathological tau (Table 2). However, detailed molecular roles of p62/SQSTM1 in tau degradation by UPS or ALP are lacking. This needs to be investigated to reveal, for instance, which oligomeric state of p62/SQSTM1 is involved in which tau degradation pathway.

## 3 TARGETING DEGRADATION PATHWAYS FOR TAU CLEARANCE

There are multiple strategies to promote the clearance of pathological tau for AD treatment, such as proteasome activators and autophagy modulators. 12 However, proteasome activators have tumorigenesis potential and show unspecific effects on other proteolytic pathways, 124 and autophagy modulators exhibit low pharmacological specificity for their targets in the autophagy process. 125 A new strategy - targeted protein degradation - recently emerged as a modality in drug discovery where bifunctional molecules bring the target protein to the degradation machinery. In this way, targeted protein degraders can promote the degradation of tau, an 'undruggable' protein, with high specificity. 16 Moreover, targeted protein degraders are eventdriven with catalytic activity, requiring only a transient binding event for activity, which significantly lowers the effective concentrations and expands the therapeutic window. 126

## 3.1 Small-molecule-based PROTACs for targeting tau

Currently, most of the targeted protein degraders for tau are PROTACs (Table 3). PROTACs are bifunctional molecules that induce selective degradation of specific proteins by harnessing a cell's UPS. By linking a ligand that binds to tau with an E3 ligase ligand, PROTACs can promote the ubiquitination and subsequent degradation of tau, offering a newavenue for therapeutic development 127 (Figures 3 and 4).

## 3.1.1 PROTAC C8

The PROTAC C8 was designed using thalidomide as an E3 ligase binder, a long-chain alkyl group was used as a linker, and quinoxaline attached a thiophene ring as tau binder. 129 This quinoxaline derivative tau binder has high affinity and selectivity for tau aggregates,

TABLE 3 Summaryof tau-targeting PROTACs.

| Reference        | 129                                                                                                      | 132                                                                                                                                                                                                   | 135                                                                                                            | 62                                                                                                                                            | 139                                                                                                                                                         | 142 143                                                                                               | 144,145                                                                                   |
|------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| BBBpermeability  | Yes, in BALB/Cnudemice, maximumfluorescence intensity of C8wasobserved at 1 h after i.v. at 3 mg/kg dose | Yes, in vitro: bEnd3 cells transwell assay with SH-SY5Y cells seeded at the bottom well In vivo: In male C57BL/6 mice, the maximal brain concentration ofT3 was 1.73 µMat0.25h, after i.v. at 8 mg/kg | Yes. In male C57BL/6 mice, maximal brain concentration of C004019was10.8ng/mLat 0.167 h, after s.c. at 3 mg/kg | Yes. In male CD-I mice,maximum brain concentration of QC-01-175 was 56.4 ng/mL at 0.5 h, after i.p. at 30 mg/kg (patent: WO2019014429A1 137 ) | Yes, in ICR male nude mice, the maximumbrain concentration of I3 was 29.10 ng/mL at 0.25 h, after intragastric (po) administration at 30 mg/kg Not reported | Not reported                                                                                          | Yes, whenloaded within neurotransmitter-derived lipidoid nanoparticle delivery system 144 |
| Animal models    | C57BL/6 mice overexpressing hTau                                                                         | MPTP-induced C57BL/6 mice model                                                                                                                                                                       | hTau-transgenic and 3 × Tg-AD mouse models                                                                     | Not reported                                                                                                                                  | Not reported Not reported                                                                                                                                   | 3 × Tg-AD mouse model                                                                                 | 3 × Tg-AD mouse model                                                                     |
| Cell models      | HEK293-hTau, SH-SY5Y (p-tau induced using okadaic acid)                                                  | Tau preformed fibril-seeding HEK293T, SH-SY5Y overexpressing α -syn                                                                                                                                   | HEK293-hTau and SH-SY5Y                                                                                        | Humanneuronal cell models derived from a PSP patient carrier of Tau-A152T risk variant and one derivedfromaFTD patient carrier of Tau P301L   | PC12cellsandPC12 transfected with GFT-tau plasmid N2acells                                                                                                  | Tau-EGFP-overexpressed N2acells, tau-overexpressed SH-SY5Y cells, 3 × Tg-AD mouseprimary neuron cells | Tau overexpressed cell lines (SH-SY5Y, N2aandPC-12)                                       |
| DC 50            | 0.05µM                                                                                                   | 1.57µM( α -Syn), 4.09 µM(tau)                                                                                                                                                                         | 0.00785µMin HEK293-hTau cell model. Subcutaneous 3 mg/kg for 24 h in mouse model                               | 0.1µM                                                                                                                                         | 50µM ∼ 50µM                                                                                                                                                 | 50µM                                                                                                  | 20µM                                                                                      |
| Target E3 ligase | CRBN                                                                                                     | CRBN                                                                                                                                                                                                  | VHL                                                                                                            | CRBN                                                                                                                                          | CRBN VHL                                                                                                                                                    | VHL                                                                                                   | Keap1                                                                                     |
| Tau binder       | QNN-3b(modified quinoxaline) 128                                                                         | BTA 130,131                                                                                                                                                                                           | ID220149 133,134                                                                                               | T807core scaffold [136]                                                                                                                       | THK5105 138 YQQYQDATADEQG ( β -tubulin sequence) 140,141                                                                                                    | YQQYQDATADEQG ( β -tubulin sequence) 140,141                                                          | YQQYQDATADEQG ( β -tubulin sequence) 140,141                                              |
| Target           | Total tau and p-tau (S202, T205, S262, S396, and S404)                                                   | α -syn, p α -syn (S129), total tau, and Tau-S404                                                                                                                                                      | Total tau, p-tau (S202, T205, S214, S262, S396, S404), and tau oligomers (T22)                                 | Total tau and p-tau (S396, S202, and T205)                                                                                                    | Total tau Total tau                                                                                                                                         | Total tau                                                                                             | Total tau and p-tau (T205)                                                                |
| PROTAC name      | C8                                                                                                       | T3                                                                                                                                                                                                    | C004019                                                                                                        | QC-01-175                                                                                                                                     | I3 Peptide 2                                                                                                                                                | TH006                                                                                                 | Keap1- dependent Peptide 1                                                                |

aggregate

<!-- image -->

FIGURE 3 Schematic of proteolysis-targeting chimeras (PROTACs), autophagy-targeting chimeras (AUTOTACs), and RING-Bait technology. (A) PROTACs bring the target protein close to the E3 ligase, which results in protein ubiquitination, followed by proteasomal degradation. (B) AUTOTACssimultaneously interact with the target protein and the autophagy cargo receptor (eg, p62/SQSTM1), which facilitates p62/SQSTM1 self-polymerization in complex with target proteins. Then the complex is delivered to the phagophore by binding to LC3, followed by autophagosome formation and lysosomal degradation. (C) RING-Bait contains a RING domain of the E3 ligase tripartite motif-containing protein 21 (TRIM21) and a bait, such as the target protein. During the target protein aggregation, RING-Baits are recruited into the aggregates. This clustering dimerizes the RING domain and activates its E3 function, leading to subsequent proteasomal degradation. Created with BioRender.com.

<!-- image -->

which enables the detection of tau aggregates in the brain through fluorescence imaging. 128 C8 effectively decreased total tau and ptau levels in HEK293 cells stably expressing WT full-length human tau (referred to as HEK293-hTau). Tau clearance induced by C8 in the HEK293-hTau cell model is through the UPS but not the ALP, as shown by using proteasome inhibitor MG132 and autophagy inhibitor bafilomycin A1. 129 C8 showed good blood-brain barrier (BBB) permeability in BALB/C nude mice by in vivo imaging after intravenous injection (3.0 mg/kg). Purified pAAV-hSyn-hTau-mCHERRY-3 × FLAG virus was injected bilaterally into the hippocampus CA1 region of male C57BL/6 mice (8 weeks old) to induce hTau-overexpressed mouse model. In this mouse model, C8 treatment (10 mg/kg, i.p., 3 times/week for 1 month) ameliorated cognitive dysfunction in novel object recognition and Morris water maze and reduced total tau and p-tau levels in the hippocampus. 129

## 3.1.2 PROTAC T3: Degradation of alpha-synuclein and tau

In several neurodegenerative illnesses, tau and alpha-synuclein ( α -Syn) play key roles in the manifestation of pathology. 146-148 Under pathological conditions, partially unfolded proteins like tau and α -Syn can form aberrant cellular aggregates and toxic oligomers. Genome-wide association studies of tau and α -Syn support their clinical relationship and the co-occurrence of their fibrillar aggregates in many illnesses. 149,150 In neurodegenerative diseases, multitarget treatment may hold significant promise for improving efficacy. Zhu et al. devised an innovative approach to targeting both tau and α -Syn: a dual PROTAC T3. 132 This PROTAC was developed by using 2-[49-(Methylamino)phenyl]-6-methylbenzothiazole (BTA) as tau and α -Syn target warhead and pomalidomide as E3 ligase cereblon (CRBN) binder. BTA, an analog of thioflavin-T, can be used as a warhead to degrade protein aggregates due to its high brain penetration and ability to bind to aggregates and oligomers. 130,131 Alabel-free fluorescence polarization assay demonstrated that BTA had a strong ability to bind to preformed fibrils from tau and α -Syn; the K D values were 2.55 ± 0.72 and 0.32 ± 0.17 µM, respectively. To increase the likelihood that the target protein would associate with the ubiquitin ligase complex, conformational flexible polyethylene glycol (PEG)-based chains were used. 151 The PEG4-derived linkers exhibited higher degradation efficiency compared to other types of linkers. A preformed tau fibrilseeding HEK293T cellular model and an α -Syn overexpression preformedfibril-seeding model in HEK293T cells were created to evaluate the degrading effects of T3. T3 induced a concentration-dependent decrease in total tau and p-tau levels following a 24-h treatment. T3 demonstrated the highest degradation rate ( D max ) of 61% and a half degradation concentration (DC 50 ) of 4.09 ± 0.90 µM against tau. Additionally, there was a notable decrease in the p-tau (S404) protein level. It is interesting to note that after 24 h of T3 therapy, p-tau was more effectively degraded than total tau. For α -Syn, T3 showed the greater degradation rate ( D max ) of 78% and the half degradation concentra-

FIGURE 4 Chemical structures of small-molecule proteolysis-targeting chimeras (PROTACs) and autophagy-targeting chimeras (AUTOTACs) for tau degradation. (A) C8, T3, QC-01-175, and I3 are PROTACs with ligands binding to tau and E3 ligase cereblon (CRBN). C004019 is the PROTACwithligands binding to tau and E3 ligase von Hippel-Lindau protein (VHL). (B) PBA-1105, PBA-1106, and Anle138b-F105 are AUTOTACs with ligands binding to tau and the autophagy cargo receptor (p62/SQSTM1).

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

tion (DC 50 ) of 1.57 ± 0.55 µM. Following a 48-h T3 therapy, there was a substantial drop in the protein level of pα Syn (S129). T3 also reduced α -Syn aggregate-induced toxicity in the SH-SY5Y cell model stably overexpressing α -Syn treated with liposome-packaged preformed fibrils. Under mechanistic evaluation, T3 enhanced the interaction between ubiquitination and α -Syn in co-immunoprecipitation analysis, and T3-mediated clearance of tau and α -Syn was through UPS, proved by using proteasome inhibitor MG132 and NEDDylation inhibitor MLN4924. T3 showed good BBB permeability not only in a monolayer cell model but also in a mouse model, as visualized by fluorescence imaging and a pharmacokinetic study. In vivo effects of T3 were evaluated in 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP)-induced mouse model. T3 treatment (8 mg/kg/day, i.v., 7 days) reduced total tau and p-tau (S404) in the midbrain and hippocampus and reduced α -Syn and pα Syn (S129) in the midbrain and substantia nigra pars compacta. Preliminary safety testing showed that T3 had no significant side effects up to 80 mg/kg/day for 2 days. Even though T3 efficiently reduces aggregation, the binding to other potential targets or cellular receptors at micromolar concentrations limits the application of this molecule in clinical studies. 132

## 3.1.3 PROTAC C004019

The small-molecule PROTAC C004019 has been shown to selectively promotetauclearance through ubiquitination-proteasome-dependent pathways. 135 C004019wasdesigned using a von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) binder conjugated with tau binder ID220149, which has been shown to interact with tau 133 and can inhibit tau aggregation. 134 C004019 induced a concentration-dependent clearance of total tau and p-tau in cell models, including HEK293-hTau, HEK293 cells with transient expression of human tau (HEK293-3xFlag-hTau or HEK293-EGFPhTau), and SH-SY5Y cells. C004019 promoted tau ubiquitination by inducing the association between tau and E3 ligase VHL, and proteasome inhibitor MG132 abolished C004019-induced tau clearance in HEK293-hTau cells. In vivo study showed that C004019 crossed the BBB in C57BL/6 mice after subcutaneous administration. C004019 effectively reduced total tau and p-tau levels in hippocampus and cortex of the human tau (hTau) transgenic mice ( Mapt tm1(EGFP)Klt Tg(MAPT)8cPdav/J) and 3 × Tg-AD mice, leading to improved synaptic and cognitive functions. 135 One concern is that C004019 can induce a sustained total-tau reduction in the brain of WT mice (4 months

old) by a single-dose subcutaneous injection (3 mg/kg). Its effects on physiological tau might induce toxicity by impairing the physiological functions of tau.

## 3.1.4 PROTAC QC-01-175: targeting tau in frontotemporal dementia

The positron emission tomography (PET) tracer 18 F -T807 exhibits a conformation-dependent binding of p-tau, demonstrating maximal efficacy in carriers of MAPT mutations that result in AD-like PHF pathophysiology. 152 The design of QC-01-175, utilizing a T807 PET tracer core scaffold and pomalidomide as an E3 ligase binder, marks a significant step forward in targeting tau in frontotemporal dementia (FTD). 62 In the biolayer interferometry assay, T807 and QC-01-175 displayed a significantly lower affinity for immobilized, soluble tau than the reported affinity of T807 for native aggregated tau filaments. 62 QC-01-175 was tested in two tauopathy neuronal cell models, one derived from a progressive supranuclear palsy patient carrier of the Tau-A152T risk variant and one derived from a behavioral-variant FTD patient carrier of the Tau P301L autosomal-dominant mutation. 62 Dermal fibroblasts were reprogrammed into patient-induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs), which were subsequently converted into corticalenriched neural progenitor cells and differentiated into neuronal cells (Tau-A152T and Tau P301L neurons). QC-01-175 treatment showed an efficient concentration-dependent reduction of total tau and p-tau (S396) levels in A152T and P301L neurons, leading on average to more than 70% and 60% clearance, respectively. The PROTAC selectively targeted tau in FTD neurons (mutant variants A152T and P301L) with minimal impact on tau in healthy control neurons, suggesting the potential to develop therapies that specifically degrade diseaseassociated tau in FTD-affected neurons while sparing normal tau protein. Further investigations showed that QC-01-175-mediated tau degradation was dependent on E3 ligase CRBN and tau binding, NEDDylation (E3 ligase function, using MLN4924), and proteasome function (using irreversible proteasome inhibitor carfilzomib), but not autophagy (using autophagy inhibitor bafilomycin A1). They also proved the ternary complex formation between tau, degrader, and CRL4 CRBN , followed by increased tau ubiquitination upon QC-01175 treatment. Moreover, QC-01-175 rescued viability loss caused by A β 1-42 in A152T neurons and had minimal off-target activity as determined by mass spectrometry proteomics. A pharmacokinetic study proved that QC-01-175 entered the brain after administration in mice. 137

Further, this group established a structure-activity relationship for QC-01-175 and optimized the PROTAC for better efficiency. 63 The study indicated that CRBN-targeting PROTACs are more effective in promoting tau degradation in human neurons compared to PROTACs targeting the E3 ligase VHL. These CRBN-targeting PROTACs have a more pronounced effect on insoluble tau in FTD neurons. Even though they have low to modest cellular permeability, they can exhibit prolonged effects on tau reduction up to 8 days following compound washout. The application of such a highly potent PROTAC in iPSC models underscores the potential of this approach in precision medicine, where targeted therapies can be tailored to specific disease subtypes and patient populations.

## 3.1.5 PROTAC I3

The PROTAC I3 is designed using PET tracer moiety THK5105 (2arylquinoline derivatives) as tau binder and modified thalidomide as E3 ligase recruiter and PEG as linker. 139 Molecule I3 has been evaluated for its ability to degrade tau in PC12 cell lines. The degradation of tau by I3 was found to be time-dependent, with maximum activity observed at 36 h after treatment. Mechanistic studies indicate that I3 promoted tau degradation via UPS, and not ALP, proved by using proteasome inhibitor MG132 and autophagy inhibitor bafilomycin A1, respectively. I3 treatment improved the uneven distribution of mitochondria induced by tau overexpression and reduced the toxicity induced by A β 1-42 in PC12 cells. Pharmacokinetic profiling for I3 was done in ICR male nude mice at a dose of 30 mg/kg. The brain to plasma concentration distribution of I3 was &gt; 1.6, suggesting the compound favors brain penetration. Though it was shown that I3 degraded total tau at 50 kDa in Western blot, it is unclear whether I3 is selective and can distinguish between healthy tau and pathological tau.

## 3.1.6 Pharmacokinetic challenges and strategies for CNS-targeted small-molecule PROTACs

Small-molecule PROTACs have a molecular weight exceeding 700 Da, poor solubility, and low permeability, making them challenging to formulate for oral delivery and limiting their ability to penetrate the BBB, a crucial factor for central nervous system (CNS)-targeted therapies. 153 Optimizing the pharmacokinetic properties of PROTACs, particularly for CNS applications, presents distinct challenges due to their structural complexity and physicochemical characteristics. The size and molecular complexity of PROTACs frequently violate traditional drug development guidelines, such as Lipinski's so-called Rule of Five, that emphasize the importance of parameters like molecular weight, lipophilicity, and hydrogen bonding for oral bioavailability. Moreover, during optimization, small structural modifications can affect the oral bioavailability, indicating that properties such as solubility/permeability can be affected not only by lipophilicity but shape, flexibility/rigidity, and pKa. 154

Achieving the optimal balance of lipophilicity in PROTACs is another major challenge. Adequate lipophilicity can facilitate membrane permeability and support BBB penetration, but excessive lipophilicity can lead to increased non-specific interactions, poor solubility, and off-target effects. Hence, tuning the lipophilic properties of PROTACs is essential to maintain a balance between efficacy and safety. The modular design of PROTACs - comprising a ligand for the protein of interest, a linker, and an E3 ligase binder - offers multiple avenues for optimization.

CNS-targeted drugs specifically benefit from having fewer hydrogen bond donors (HBDs) and a low polar surface area (PSA), typically below90Å 2 , to effectively cross the BBB. 155 However,PROTACsoften

have high PSA values and multiple HBDs due to their bifunctional nature, necessitating design modifications to reduce these features while retaining sufficient activity to induce protein degradation.

Linker design plays a pivotal role in the pharmacokinetic profile of PROTACs. Incorporating rigid, cyclic structures within the linker can constrain the conformational flexibility of the molecule, leading to enhanced metabolic stability and improved BBB permeability. Reducing the number of rotatable bonds in the linker can also decrease the entropic penalty during target binding, making the overall molecule more drug-like. In recent studies, PROTACs that demonstrated 'chameleonic' properties, where they adapted their conformation based on environmental factors, showed promise in achieving better passive permeability. 156 These chameleonic behaviors often involve reversible intramolecular hydrogen bonds that stabilize compact, non-polar conformations in non-aqueous environments, aiding in BBB penetration while maintaining biological activity in target-rich aqueous conditions.

ExperimentalandcomputationalapproachestooptimizingPROTAC pharmacokinetics face inherent challenges due to the unique properties of these molecules. Standard in vitro assays for assessing parameters like permeability and protein binding, originally designed for small molecules, often yield unreliable or inconsistent results with PROTACs. This discrepancy is attributed to their size, lipophilicity, and tendency to adhere to labware or biological membranes, which can distort assay outcomes.Consequently,thereisapressingneedforassayadaptations and new methodologies tailored to PROTAC evaluation. 157 Computational modeling of PROTAC dynamics is similarly complicated. The flexibility and size of PROTACs create a multitude of potential conformations, complicating the prediction of how these molecules form the ternary complexes required for effective target degradation. Advances in molecular dynamic simulations and NMR spectroscopy are providing critical insights into the conformational states of PROTACs, but the predictive accuracy for CNS-targeting remains limited.

To address these challenges, researchers are trying novel approaches, such as designing PROTACs with conformationally constrained linkers, which reduces flexibility while maintaining high affinity for the target and E3 ligase. Additionally, the development of high-throughput screening methods, including direct-to-biology approaches, enables rapid assessment of large libraries of PROTAC variants. These screening techniques allow researchers to bypass some of the synthetic bottlenecks and directly evaluate PROTAC efficacy in cell-based systems, accelerating the optimization process. Furthermore, property-based guidelines specific to CNS-targeted PROTACs are being established, with particular emphasis on minimizing HBDs, managing PSA, and ensuring that lipophilicity remains within a suitable range for both oral bioavailability and CNS penetration. 158

## 3.2 Peptide-based PROTACs for targeting tau

## 3.2.1 Peptide 2

Peptide-based PROTACs are bifunctional molecules with a target protein binding sequence and a specific amino acid degradation sequence

(degron) that binds to an E3 ligase for proteasomal degradation. 159 Peptide therapeutics typically have advantages over small molecules because of their larger protein-protein interaction interface but have historically been limited by their instability and membrane impermeability. 160 One such example is a peptide PROTAC, Peptide 2, incorporating a β -hairpin sequence motif, which significantly increases intracellular stability and cell permeability. 142 Peptide 2 was synthesized by combining a β -hairpin sequence RWVRVpGRWIRQ and tau binding sequence YQQYQDATADEQG. It significantly reduced total tau levels at concentrations above 100 µM in N2a cells. 142 This tau-reducing effect is dependent on both the E1 enzyme and proteasome activity, which was confirmed by using E1 ubiquitin-activating enzyme inhibitor PYR-41 and proteasome inhibitor MG-132, respectively. To characterize the ability of Peptide 2 to penetrate cells, a fluorescent version of the peptide was synthesized by labeling it with 5(6)-carboxyfluorescein. Peptide 2 showed time-dependent uptake into N2a cells by live-cell fluorescence imaging. However, this study lacks testing in suitable animal models with tau pathology and further in vivo investigation on pharmacokinetics and BBB permeability properties.

## 3.2.2 TH006

TH006, a peptide-based PROTAC, was designed with a tau-binding sequence (YQQYQDATADEQG), an E3 ligase binder (ALAPYIP), a GSGS linker, and an octa D-arginine cell-penetrating peptide. 143 TH006 labeled by 5(6)-carboxyfluorescein showed tau binding affinity in a fluorescence polarization assay and good cell permeability by flow cytometry and confocal microscopy. TH006 can reduce total tau levels in tau-EGFP-overexpressed N2a cells, SH-SY5Y cells transfected with pEGFP-tau vector, and primary neurons derived from 3 × Tg-AD mouse. Mechanism investigations showed that TH006 promoted K48linked polyubiquitination of tau and interacted with E3 ligase VHL. The addition of proteasome inhibitor MG132 or autophagy inhibitor bafilomycin A1 can counteract its tau clearance effect, suggesting that both UPS and ALP are involved in its tau degradation. In addition, TH006 can rescue the uneven distribution of mitochondria in tauoverexpressing cells and reduce the toxicity of A β 1-42 . An in vivo study showed that TH006 treatment (intranasal administration combined with i.v. for 10 days) could reduce total tau levels in the cerebral cortex region of 3 × Tg-AD mice. 143

## 3.2.3 Keap1-dependent Peptide 1

Kelch-like ECH-associated protein-1 (Keap1) functions as a substrate adaptor protein for Cullin 3/Ring-Box1-dependent E3 ubiquitin ligase complex. 161 A PROTAC was designed by joining Keap1 binding peptide (LDPETGEYL) and tau binder (YQQYQDATADEQG) with a short stretch of linker peptide (GSGS) (Peptide 1). To enhance cell uptake of the designed construct an octa D-arginine stretch (rrrrrrrr) was joined at the C-terminal side of the construct. 145 Keap1dependent Peptide 1 showed strong binding ability to Keap1 or tau in

the isothermal titration calorimetry assay and promoted interactions between Keap1 and tau in SH-SY5Y cells in co-immunoprecipitation analysis. TAMRA-Peptide 1 was used to prove its cell permeability by flow cytometry and fluorescence imaging. Keap1-dependent Peptide 1 reduced total tau levels in different tau-overexpressed cell lines (SH-SY5Y, N2a, and PC-12), with no changes in Keap1 levels. The mechanistic studies revealed that the tau clearance was mediated through Keap1-dependent ubiquitination and proteasome-mediated pathways, confirmed by the application of Keap1 siRNA silencing and the proteasome inhibitor MG132. This study proved that Keap1 could also be a promising E3 ligase adaptor for the design of tau-targeting PROTACs. 145

Most peptides have poor stability in vivo due to the presence of proteases and low membrane penetration ability. To overcome these limitations, one study generated a neurotransmitter-derived lipidoid nanoparticle delivery system. 144 Keap1-dependent Peptide 1 was loaded onto these positively charged nanoparticles using DNA-intercalation technology, known as Neurotransmitter-Derived Lipidoids-PROTACs-DNA Nanocomplex. The nanocomplex had good cell permeability and crossed BBB efficiently, not only in a twodimensional cell model but also in an in vivo mouse model. Compared to Peptide 1 only, the nanocomplex showed increased clearance efficiency for total tau and p-tau (T205) in N2a cells and induced the association between tau and Keap1 successfully. In 3 × Tg-AD mice, the nanocomplex also demonstrated a superior clearance of total tau and p-tau (T205) in the hippocampal and cortical regions of the brain and a superior therapeutic efficacy on cognitive function in Morris water maze. Moreover, the nanocomplex displayed good safety profiles in N2acellsanda3 × Tg-ADmousemodel,providingsupportforitsfurther clinical development.

## 3.3 AUTOTACs: an emerging strategy for tau degradation

In addition to PROTACs, a new class of bifunctional molecules known as AUTOTACs has emerged (Figures 3 and 4). AUTOTACs differ from PROTACs in that they target proteins for degradation via the ALP rather than the UPS. AUTOTACs are composed of a target-binding ligand, a linker, and an autophagy-targeting domain. They can promote interactions between target protein and autophagy cargo receptors, leading to the activation of autophagy and the subsequent degradation of the target protein in the lysosome.

Ji et al. developed several ligands binding to the ZZ domain of p62/SQSTM1, which is one of the important autophagy cargo receptors for selective autophagy. 162,163 Then they used these p62/SQSTM1-ZZ-binding ligands to synthesize AUTOTACs, linking to different target-binding ligands via a repeating PEG moiety. The oligomeric modulator anle138b ([3-(1,3-benzodioxol-5-yl)-5(3-bromophenyl)-1H-pyrazole]) 164 and the chemical chaperone 4-phenylbutiryl acid (PBA) were selected as the two target-binding warheads for misfolded protein aggregates. PBA-1105, PBA-1106, PBA-1105b, and Anle138b-F105 are examples of their designed

AUTOTACs. These AUTOTACs exhibited excellent degradative potency against aggregation-prone P301L mutant tau and its aggregates and Q97 mutant huntingtin in cell models. An in vivo study showed that PBA-1105 treatment (20 or 50 mg/kg, i.p., 3 times/week, 4 weeks) induced marked clearance of detergent-insoluble Tau P301L in the brain in a dosage-dependent manner, but with no effects on WT murine tau levels. The use of AUTOTACs for targeted protein degradation represents a novel therapeutic approach, particularly for diseases where proteasome function may be compromised or where autophagy plays a critical role in disease pathology.

## 3.4 RING-Bait technology

RING-Bait technology, a selective degradation method for tau aggregates, has shown promise in treating AD. In this approach, the RING domain of the E3 ligase tripartite motif-containing protein 21 (TRIM21) is fused to the 'Bait,' tau 165 (Figure 3). When the RINGtau is recruited into tau aggregates, the clustering dimerizes the RING domain and activates its E3 function, leading to subsequent degradation of tau aggregates. 165,166 In HEK293 cell models, RING-tau (P301S, 0N4R) prevented seeded tau (induced by heparin) aggregation and removed existing aggregates, with no significant effects on soluble endogenous tau levels. RING-tau (WT, 0N3R) and RING-tau (WT, 0N4R) prevented seeded tau aggregation induced by AD and PSP post mortem brain extracts, respectively. Similar effects were also observed in primary neurons from transgenic mice (Tau P301S). Mechanism investigation showed that E1 ubiquitin-activating enzyme inhibitor TAK-243, VCP inhibitor NMS-873, or proteasome inhibitor MG-132 was able to reverse the aggregate removal effects, indicating that RING-tau was dependent on the UPS to degrade tau aggregates. An in vivo study showed that RING-tau treatment (packaged in AAV 9P31, i.v.) significantly and selectively reduced the burden of tau aggregates and improved motor functions in Tg2541 (Tau P301S) mice. A similar kind of approach based on the TRIM21 RING domain was devised by Benn et al. 167 In this approach, the RING domain of TRIM21 is fused with anti-tau C-terminal nanobody F8-2 168 and delivered to cells. RING-nanobody degraders prevented or reversed tau aggregation in cell and animal models, with minimal impact on monomeric tau. Though this technology can selectively clear tau aggregates, introducing a sufficient amount of RING-Bait degraders into the human brain is challenging. Both approaches used AAV gene delivery vehicles in animal studies; however, host immune responses remain a principal barrier for successful AAV gene therapy in humans. 169 Combining strategies to overcome AAV immune responses or apply alternative delivery methods for administration will increase the potential of RING-Bait technology in clinical study.

## 4 CONCLUSIONS AND PERSPECTIVES

In summary, tau degradation mechanisms are complicated, and many factors determine which route is taken, such as tau post-translational

modifications, aggregation, and mutations. In AD, both UPS and ALP are impaired, and their lower efficiency has detrimental effects on tau turnover, potentially enhancing tau accumulation and pathology. Moreover, pathological tau further impairs degradative pathways, forming a vicious circle for AD progression. Several key factors targeting tau degradation, such as E3 ligases, DUBs, and autophagy cargo receptors, havebeensummarized,andtheirdysfunctioninADvariesconsiderably depending on different brain regions and disease stages. The human genomeencodesover600E3ligases 170 and nearly 100 DUBs. 171 Only a few of them have been reported to relate to tau degradation. More investigations are needed to determine whether other important E3 ligases or DUBs mediate tau degradation, especially distributed only in the brain and neurons, which can provide novel specific therapeutic targets. Importantly, UPS and ALP are coordinated, and ubiquitin plays an important role in most of their communications. 121 A deep understanding of their crosstalk can provide more specific controls for tau turnover by enabling the choice of the optimal pathway for degradation.

An emerging strategy to increase tau clearance is to target protein degradation by promoting UPS or ALP functions. Currently, most of the targeted protein degraders for tau are PROTACs. Almost all of these tau-targeting PROTACs are designed to recruit E3 ligase VHL or CRBN, which are expressed in the whole body and attach K48-linked ubiquitin chains to the target protein for proteasome degradation. 172 Choosing other E3 ligases with brain-, neuron-, or disease-specific expression profiles will significantly improve the specificity of PROTACs. Designing PROTACs to recruit E3 ligases able to form specific ubiquitin chains for aggrephagy could promote tau degradation via ALP, which is especially important for the clearance of tau-insoluble aggregates. Until now, only one publication reported the development of tau-targeting AUTOTACs, bringing tau close to p62/SQSTM1 to promote ALP degradation. 162 Other autophagy cargo receptors can also be applied for the design of tau-targeting AUTOTACs. In addition, many other strategies, such as autophagy-targeting chimera, autophagosometethering compounds, and lysosome-targeting chimera, can be applied to tau degradation via lysosomes. 173 The recent development of dephosphorylation-targeting chimaera provides an alternative strategy to promote tau degradation by recruiting phosphatases to tau for reducing tau hyperphosphorylation. 174-176 In most small-moleculetargeted tau degraders, the structures of tau-binding ligands are from tau PET tracers, tau aggregation inhibitors, and fluorescence probes for tau aggregates. Investigation into new ligands that selectively bind to more toxic forms of tau, such as hyperphosphorylated tau and tau oligomers, 177,178 might provide more efficient targeted protein degraders to cure tau pathologies. With more advanced biomarkers to help with staging AD, 179 it is crucial to apply these targeted tau degraders at the early stage, since both degradation pathways are impaired during disease progress.

With encouragement from PROTAC ARV-471, which degrades the estrogen receptor in breast tumors, in the clinical phase III stage, 180 we believe that targeted tau degraders will offer new treatment options for patients with AD or other diseases with tau pathologies.

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by grants from Margaretha af Ugglas Foundation, Swedish Research Council (2024-03573), the private initiative 'Innovative Ways to Fight Alzheimer's Disease - Leif Lundblad Family and Others,' Swedish Brain Foundation (Hjärnfonden, FO2024-0287-HK-66), Foundation for Geriatric Diseases at Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska Institutet Research Grants, Tore Nilssons Foundation for Medical Research, ÅHLÉN Foundation, Gun and Bertil Stohnes Foundation, Gamla Tjänarinnor Foundation, and Strategic Research Program in Neuroscience (StratNeuro) funding for postdoctoral researchers at Karolinska Institutet.

## CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT

The authors report no conflicts of interest. Author disclosures are available in the Supporting Information.

## CONSENT STATEMENT

All human subjects provided informed consent or their consent was unnecessary. The informed consent of human subjects is not applicable to this review.

## REFERENCES

1. 2024 Alzheimer's disease facts and figures. Alzheimers Dement . 2024;20:3708-3821. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38689398/
2. WinbladB,AmouyelP,AndrieuS,etal.DefeatingAlzheimer'sdisease and other dementias: a priority for European science and society. Lancet Neurol . 2016;15:455-532.
3. Grundke-Iqbal I, Iqbal K, Quinlan M, Tung YC, Zaidi MS, Wisniewski HM. Microtubule-associated protein tau. A component of Alzheimer paired helical filaments. J Biol Chem . 1986;261:6084-6089.
4. Trejo-Lopez JA, Yachnis AT, Prokop S. Neuropathology of Alzheimer's disease. Neurotherapeutics . 2022;19:173-185.
5. Iqbal K. Tau and Alzheimer's disease: past, present and future. Cytoskeleton (Hoboken) . 2024;81:116-121.
6. Wang Y, Mandelkow E. Tau in physiology and pathology. Nat Rev Neurosci . 2016;17:5-21.
7. Grundke-IqbalI, Iqbal K, Tung YC, Quinlan M, Wisniewski HM, Binder LI. Abnormal phosphorylation of the microtubule-associated protein tau (tau) in Alzheimer cytoskeletal pathology. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 1986;83:4913-4917.
8. Iqbal K, Grundke-Iqbal I, Zaidi T, et al. Defective brain microtubule assembly in Alzheimer's disease. Lancet . 1986;2:421-426.
9. Alonso AC, Zaidi T, Grundke-Iqbal I, Iqbal K. Role of abnormally phosphorylated tau in the breakdown of microtubules in Alzheimer disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 1994;91:5562-5566.
10. Alonso AC, Grundke-Iqbal I, Iqbal K. Alzheimer's disease hyperphosphorylated tau sequesters normal tau into tangles of filaments and disassembles microtubules. Nat Med . 1996;2:783-787.
11. Wang JZ, Grundke-Iqbal I, Iqbal K. Kinases and phosphatases and tau sites involved in Alzheimer neurofibrillary degeneration. Eur J Neurosci . 2007;25:59-68.
12. Wang L, Bharti KR, Pavlov PF, Winblad B. Small molecule therapeutics for tauopathy in Alzheimer's disease: Walking on the path of most resistance. Eur J Med Chem . 2021;209:112915.
13. Congdon EE, Ji C, Tetlow AM, Jiang Y, Sigurdsson EM. Tau-targeting therapies for Alzheimer disease: current status and future directions. Nat Rev Neurol . 2023;19:715-736.
14. Kovacech B, Cullen NC, Novak P, et al. Post hoc analysis of ADAMANT, a phase 2 clinical trial of active tau immunotherapy with

- AADvac1 in patients with Alzheimer's disease, positive for plasma p-tau217. Alzheimers Res Ther . 2024;16:254.
15. Sigurdsson EM. Tau immunotherapies for Alzheimer's disease and related tauopathies: status of trials and insights from preclinical studies. J Alzheimers Dis . 2024;101:S129-S140.
16. InuzukaH,LiuJ,WeiW,RezaeianAH.PROTACstechnologyfortreatment of Alzheimer's disease: advances and perspectives. Acta Mater Med . 2022;1:24-41.
17. ChungKM,HernandezN,SproulAA,YuWH.Alzheimer'sdiseaseand the autophagic-lysosomal system. Neurosci Lett . 2019;697:49-58.
18. Reits EA, Benham AM, Plougastel B, Neefjes J, Trowsdale J. Dynamics of proteasome distribution in living cells. EMBO J . 1997;16:60876094.
19. von Mikecz A. The nuclear ubiquitin-proteasome system. J Cell Sci . 2006;119:1977-1984.
20. Harris LD, Jasem S, Licchesi JDF. The Ubiquitin system in Alzheimer's disease. Adv Exp Med Biol . 2020;1233:195-221.
21. Mao Y. Structure, dynamics and function of the 26S proteasome. Subcell Biochem . 2021;96:1-151.
22. Liu WJ, Ye L, Huang WF, et al. p62 links the autophagy pathway and the ubiqutin-proteasome system upon ubiquitinated protein degradation. Cell Mol Biol Lett . 2016;21:29.
23. Grune T, Botzen D, Engels M, et al. Tau protein degradation is catalyzed by the ATP/ubiquitin-independent 20S proteasome under normal cell conditions. Arch Biochem Biophys . 2010;500:181188.
24. David DC, Layfield R, Serpell L, Narain Y, Goedert M, Spillantini MG. Proteasomal degradation of tau protein. J Neurochem . 2002;83:176185.
25. Tang M, Harrison J, Deaton CA, Johnson GVW. Tau clearance mechanisms. Adv Exp Med Biol . 2019;1184:57-68.
26. Shimura H, Schwartz D, Gygi SP, Kosik KS. CHIP-Hsc70 complex ubiquitinates phosphorylated tau and enhances cell survival. J Biol Chem . 2004;279:4869-4876.
27. Petrucelli L, Dickson D, Kehoe K, et al. CHIP and Hsp70 regulate tau ubiquitination, degradation and aggregation. Hum Mol Genet . 2004;13:703-714.
28. Reinhardt L, Musacchio F, Bichmann M, et al. Dual truncation of tau by caspase-2 accelerates its CHIP-mediated degradation. Neurobiol Dis . 2023;182:106126.
29. Nadel CM, Pokhrel S, Wucherer K, et al. Phosphorylation of tau at a single residue inhibits binding to the E3 ubiquitin ligase, CHIP. Nat Commun . 2024;15:7972.
30. Dickey CA, Yue M, Lin WL, et al. Deletion of the ubiquitin ligase CHIP leads to the accumulation, but not the aggregation, of both endogenous phospho- and caspase-3-cleaved tau species. J Neurosci . 2006;26:6985-6996.
31. Zhang YJ, Xu YF, Liu XH, et al. Carboxyl terminus of heat-shock cognate 70-interacting protein degrades tau regardless its phosphorylation status without affecting the spatial memory of the rats. J Neural Transm (Vienna) . 2008;115:483-491.
32. Hu Z, Yang J, Zhang S, et al. AAV mediated carboxyl terminus of Hsp70 interacting protein overexpression mitigates the cognitive and pathological phenotypes of APP/PS1 mice. Neural Regen Res . 2025;20:253-264.
33. Nadel CM, Thwin AC, Callahan M, et al. The E3 ubiquitin ligase, CHIP/STUB1, inhibits aggregation of phosphorylated proteoforms of microtubule-associated protein Tau (MAPT). J Mol Biol . 2023;435:168026.
34. Munari F, Mollica L, Valente C, et al. Structural basis for chaperoneindependent ubiquitination of Tau protein by Its E3 Ligase CHIP. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl . 2022;61:e202112374.
35. Babu JR, Geetha T, Wooten MW. Sequestosome 1/p62 shuttles polyubiquitinated tau for proteasomal degradation. J Neurochem . 2005;94:192-203.
36. Flach K, Ramminger E, Hilbrich I, et al. Axotrophin/MARCH7 acts as an E3 ubiquitin ligase and ubiquitinates tau protein in vitro impairing microtubule binding. Biochim Biophys Acta . 2014;1842:1527-1538.
37. Shen YX, Sun AM, Fang S, et al. Hrd1 facilitates tau degradation and promotes neuron survival. Curr Mol Med . 2012;12:138-152.
38. Samelson AJ, Ariqat N, McKetney J, et al. CRISPR screens in iPSCderived neurons reveal principles of tau proteostasis. bioRxiv . 2024. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37398204/
39. Wang P, Joberty G, Buist A, et al. Tau interactome mapping based identification of Otub1 as Tau deubiquitinase involved in accumulation of pathological Tau forms in vitro and in vivo. Acta Neuropathol . 2017;133:731-1749.
40. Koglsberger S, Cordero-Maldonado ML, Antony P, et al. Genderspecific expression of ubiquitin-specific peptidase 9 modulates tau expression and phosphorylation: possible implications for tauopathies. Mol Neurobiol . 2017;54:7979-7993.
41. Wei Z, Zeng K, Hu J, et al. USP10 deubiquitinates Tau, mediating its aggregation. Cell Death Dis . 2022;13:726.
42. Yan Y, Wang X, Chaput D, et al. X-linked ubiquitin-specific peptidase 11increases tauopathy vulnerability in women. Cell . 2022;185:39133930.e19.
43. Liu X, Hebron ML, Mulki S, et al. Ubiquitin specific protease 13 regulates tau accumulation and clearance in models of Alzheimer's disease. J Alzheimers Dis . 2019;72:425-441.
44. Lee JH, Shin SK, Jiang Y, et al. Facilitated Tau degradation by USP14 aptamers via enhanced proteasome activity. Sci Rep . 2015;5:10757.
45. Boselli M, Lee BH, Robert J, et al. An inhibitor of the proteasomal deubiquitinating enzyme USP14 induces tau elimination in cultured neurons. J Biol Chem . 2017;292:19209-19225.
46. Xie M, Han Y, Yu Q, Wang X, Wang S, Liao X. UCH-L1 inhibition decreases the microtubule-binding function of Tau protein. J Alzheimers Dis . 2016;49:353-363.
47. SaharaN,MurayamaM,MizorokiT,etal.InvivoevidenceofCHIPupregulation attenuating tau aggregation. J Neurochem . 2005;94:12541263.
48. Ravalin M, Theofilas P, Basu K, et al. Specificity for latent C termini links the E3 ubiquitin ligase CHIP to caspases. Nat Chem Biol . 2019;15:786-794.
49. Hou HL, Shen YX, Zhu HY, et al. Alterations of hHrd1 expression are related to hyperphosphorylated tau in the hippocampus in Alzheimer's disease. J Neurosci Res . 2006;84:1862-1870.
50. Kaneko M, Koike H, Saito R, Kitamura Y, Okuma Y, Nomura Y. Loss of HRD1-mediated protein degradation causes amyloid precursor protein accumulation and amyloid-beta generation. J Neurosci . 2010;30:3924-3932.
51. Zhou J, Chuang Y, Redding-Ochoa J, et al. The autophagy adaptor TRIAD3A promotes tau fibrillation by nested phase separation. Nat Cell Biol . 2024;26:1274-1286.
52. Piatnitskaia S, Takahashi M, Kitaura H, et al. USP10 is a critical factor for Tau-positive stress granule formation in neuronal cells. Sci Rep . 2019;9:10591.
53. ZhengJJ,LiWX,LiuJQ,etal.Lowexpressionofaging-relatedNRXN3 is associated with Alzheimer disease: a systematic review and metaanalysis. Medicine (Baltimore) . 2018;97:e11343.
54. Minjarez B, Valero Rustarazo ML, Sanchez del Pino MM, et al. Identification of polypeptides in neurofibrillary tangles and total homogenates of brains with Alzheimer's disease by tandem mass spectrometry. J Alzheimers Dis . 2013;34:239-262.
55. Choi J, Levey AI, Weintraub ST, et al. Oxidative modifications and down-regulation of ubiquitin carboxyl-terminal hydrolase L1 associated with idiopathic Parkinson's and Alzheimer's diseases. J Biol Chem . 2004;279:13256-13264.
56. Sultana R, Boyd-Kimball D, Cai J, et al. Proteomics analysis of the Alzheimer's disease hippocampal proteome. J Alzheimers Dis . 2007;11:153-164.

57. Guglielmotto M, Repetto IE, Monteleone D, et al. Stroke and amyloid-beta downregulate TREM-2 and Uch-L1 expression that synergistically promote the inflammatory response. J Alzheimers Dis . 2019;71:907-920.
58. Chen J, Huang RY, Turko IV. Mass spectrometry assessment of ubiquitin carboxyl-terminal hydrolase L1 partitioning between soluble and particulate brain homogenate fractions. Anal Chem . 2013;85:6011-6017.
59. Ye Y, Klenerman D, Finley D. N-terminal ubiquitination of amyloidogenic proteins triggers removal of their oligomers by the proteasome holoenzyme. J Mol Biol . 2020;432:585-596.
60. Cliffe R, Sang JC, Kundel F, Finley D, Klenerman D, Ye Y. Filamentous aggregates are fragmented by the proteasome holoenzyme. Cell Rep . 2019;26:2140-2149.e3.
61. Rubinsztein DC. The roles of intracellular protein-degradation pathways in neurodegeneration. Nature . 2006;443:780-786.
62. Silva MC, Ferguson FM, Cai Q, et al. Targeted degradation of aberrant tau in frontotemporal dementia patient-derived neuronal cell models. Elife . 2019;8:e45457.
63. Silva MC, Nandi G, Donovan KA, et al. Discovery and optimization of tau targeted protein degraders enabled by patient induced pluripotent stem cells-derived neuronal models of tauopathy. Front Cell Neurosci . 2022;16:801179.
64. Ryder BD, Wydorski PM, Hou Z, Joachimiak LA. Chaperoning shapeshifting tau in disease. Trends Biochem Sci . 2022;47:301-313.
65. Abreha MH, Dammer EB, Ping L, et al. Quantitative analysis of the brain ubiquitylome in Alzheimer's disease. Proteomics . 2018;18:e1800108.
66. Li L, Jiang Y, Wang JZ, Liu R, Wang X. Tau ubiquitination in Alzheimer's disease. Front Neurol . 2021;12:786353.
67. Cripps D, Thomas SN, Jeng Y, Yang F, Davies P, Yang AJ. Alzheimer disease-specific conformation of hyperphosphorylated paired helical filament-Tau is polyubiquitinated through Lys-48, Lys-11, and Lys-6 ubiquitin conjugation. J Biol Chem . 2006;281:10825-10838.
68. Nakayama Y, Sakamoto S, Tsuji K, Ayaki T, Tokunaga F, Ito H. Identification of linear polyubiquitin chain immunoreactivity in tau pathology of Alzheimer's disease. Neurosci Lett . 2019;703:53-57.
69. Kaneko M, Saito R, Okuma Y, Nomura Y. Possible involvement of ubiquitin ligase HRD1 insolubilization in amyloid beta generation. Biol Pharm Bull . 2012;35:269-272.
70. Keller JN, Hanni KB, Markesbery WR. Impaired proteasome function in Alzheimer's disease. J Neurochem . 2000;75:436-439.
71. Keck S, Nitsch R, Grune T, Ullrich O. Proteasome inhibition by paired helical filament-tau in brains of patients with Alzheimer's disease. J Neurochem . 2003;85:115-122.
72. Myeku N, Clelland CL, Emrani S, et al. Tau-driven 26S proteasome impairment and cognitive dysfunction can be prevented early in disease by activating cAMP-PKA signaling. Nat Med . 2016;22:4653.
73. Glick D, Barth S, Macleod KF. Autophagy: cellular and molecular mechanisms. J Pathol . 2010;221:3-12.
74. Feng Y, He D, Yao Z, Klionsky DJ. The machinery of macroautophagy. Cell Res . 2014;24:24-41.
75. Kim J, Kundu M, Viollet B, Guan KL. AMPK and mTOR regulate autophagy through direct phosphorylation of Ulk1. Nat Cell Biol . 2011;13:132-141.
76. Wang L, Klionsky DJ, Shen HM. The emerging mechanisms and functions of microautophagy. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol . 2023;24:186-203.
77. Kaushik S, Cuervo AM. The coming of age of chaperone-mediated autophagy. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol . 2018;19:365-381.
78. Lamark T, Johansen T. Aggrephagy: selective disposal of protein aggregates by macroautophagy. Int J Cell Biol . 2012;2012:736905.
79. Ono M, Komatsu M, Ji B, et al. Central role for p62/SQSTM1 in the elimination of toxic tau species in a mouse model of tauopathy. Aging Cell . 2022;21:e13615.
80. Xu Y, Zhang S, Zheng H. The cargo receptor SQSTM1 ameliorates neurofibrillary tangle pathology and spreading through selective targeting of pathological MAPT (microtubule associated protein tau). Autophagy . 2019;15:583-598.
81. Xu Y, Liu Y, Chen X, et al. OPTN attenuates the neurotoxicity of abnormal Tau protein by restoring autophagy. Transl Psychiatry . 2022;12:230.
82. Jo C, Gundemir S, Pritchard S, Jin YN, Rahman I, Johnson GV. Nrf2 reduces levels of phosphorylated tau protein by inducing autophagy adaptor protein NDP52. Nat Commun . 2014;5:3496.
83. Lin H, Sandkuhler S, Dunlea C, Rodwell-Bullock J, King DH, Johnson GVW. BAG3 regulates the specificity of the recognition of specific MAPT species by NBR1 and SQSTM1. Autophagy . 2024;20:577589.
84. Ye Y, Jia P, Miao J, et al. CCDC50 mediates the clearance of protein aggregates to prevent cellular proteotoxicity. Autophagy . 2024;20(11):2529-2539.
85. Ferrari L, Bauer B, Qiu Y, et al. Tau fibrils evade autophagy by excessive p62 coating and TAX1BP1 exclusion. Sci Adv . 2024;10:eadm8449.
86. Ma X, Lu C, Chen Y, et al. CCT2 is an aggrephagy receptor for clearance of solid protein aggregates. Cell . 2022;185:1325-1345.e22.
87. Wang Y, Martinez-Vicente M, Kruger U, et al. Tau fragmentation, aggregation and clearance: the dual role of lysosomal processing. HumMolGenet . 2009;18:4153-4170.
88. Caballero B, Wang Y, Diaz A, et al. Interplay of pathogenic forms of human tau with different autophagic pathways. Aging Cell . 2018;17:e12692.
89. Caballero B, Bourdenx M, Luengo E, et al. Acetylated tau inhibits chaperone-mediated autophagy and promotes tau pathology propagation in mice. Nat Commun . 2021;12:2238.
90. Orr ME, Oddo S. Autophagic/lysosomal dysfunction in Alzheimer's disease. Alzheimers Res Ther . 2013;5:53.
91. Kenney DL, Benarroch EE. The autophagy-lysosomal pathway: General concepts and clinical implications. Neurology . 2015;85:634645.
92. Nixon RA, Wegiel J, Kumar A, et al. Extensive involvement of autophagy in Alzheimer disease: an immuno-electron microscopy study. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol . 2005;64:113-122.
93. Lipinski MM, Zheng B, Lu T, et al. Genome-wide analysis reveals mechanisms modulating autophagy in normal brain aging and in Alzheimer's disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 2010;107:1416414169.
94. Boland B, Kumar A, Lee S, et al. Autophagy induction and autophagosome clearance in neurons: relationship to autophagic pathology in Alzheimer's disease. J Neurosci . 2008;28:6926-6937.
95. Bordi M, Berg MJ, Mohan PS, et al. Autophagy flux in CA1 neurons of Alzheimer hippocampus: increased induction overburdens failing lysosomes to propel neuritic dystrophy. Autophagy . 2016;12:24672483.
96. Nixon RA. Autophagy, amyloidogenesis and Alzheimer disease. J Cell Sci . 2007;120:4081-4091.
97. Bourdenx M, Martin-Segura A, Scrivo A, et al. Chaperone-mediated autophagy prevents collapse of the neuronal metastable proteome. Cell . 2021;184:2696-2714.e25.
98. Zhang W, Xu C, Sun J, Shen HM, Wang J, Yang C. Impairment of the autophagy-lysosomal pathway in Alzheimer's diseases: pathogenic mechanisms and therapeutic potential. Acta Pharm Sin B . 2022;12:1019-1040.
99. Liu Z, Li T, Li P, et al. The ambiguous relationship of oxidative stress, tau hyperphosphorylation, and autophagy dysfunction in Alzheimer's disease. Oxid Med Cell Longev . 2015;2015:352723.
100. HamanoT, Gendron TF, Causevic E, et al. Autophagic-lysosomal perturbation enhances tau aggregation in transfectants with induced wild-type tau expression. Eur J Neurosci . 2008;27:1119-1130.

101. Kuusisto E, Salminen A, Alafuzoff I. Early accumulation of p62 in neurofibrillary tangles in Alzheimer's disease: possible role in tangle formation. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol . 2002;28:228-237.
102. Ahmed ME, Iyer S, Thangavel R, et al. Co-localization of glia maturation factor with NLRP3 inflammasome and autophagosome markers in human Alzheimer's disease brain. J Alzheimers Dis . 2017;60:11431160.
103. Du Y, Wooten MC, Gearing M, Wooten MW. Age-associated oxidative damage to the p62 promoter: implications for Alzheimer disease. Free Radic Biol Med . 2009;46:492-501.
104. Dong W, Cui MC, Hu WZ, et al. Genetic and molecular evaluation of SQSTM1/p62 on the neuropathologies of Alzheimer's disease. Front Aging Neurosci . 2022;14:829232.
105. Tanji K, Miki Y, Ozaki T, et al. Phosphorylation of serine 349 of p62 in Alzheimer's disease brain. Acta Neuropathol Commun . 2014;2:50.
106. Hortobagyi T, Troakes C, Nishimura AL, et al. Optineurin inclusions occur in a minority of TDP-43 positive ALS and FTLD-TDP cases and are rarely observed in other neurodegenerative disorders. Acta Neuropathol . 2011;121:519-527.
107. Roca-Agujetas V, Barbero-Camps E, de Dios C, et al. Cholesterol alters mitophagy by impairing optineurin recruitment and lysosomal clearance in Alzheimer's disease. Mol Neurodegener . 2021;16:15.
108. Estfanous S, Daily KP, Eltobgy M, et al. Elevated expression of MiR-17 in microglia of Alzheimer's disease patients abrogates autophagy-mediated amyloid-beta degradation. Front Immunol . 2021;12:705581.
109. Ma X, Feng Y, Quan X, et al. Multi-omics analysis revealed the role of CCT2 in the induction of autophagy in Alzheimer's disease. Front Genet . 2022;13:967730.
110. Kocaturk NM, Gozuacik D. Crosstalk between mammalian autophagy and the ubiquitin-proteasome system. Front Cell Dev Biol . 2018;6:128.
111. Kruger U, Wang Y, Kumar S, Mandelkow EM. Autophagic degradation of tau in primary neurons and its enhancement by trehalose. Neurobiol Aging . 2012;33:2291-2305.
112. Lei Z, Brizzee C, Johnson GV. BAG3 facilitates the clearance of endogenous tau in primary neurons. Neurobiol Aging . 2015;36:241248.
113. Hicke L, Schubert HL, Hill CP. Ubiquitin-binding domains. NatRevMol Cell Biol . 2005;6:610-621.
114. Swatek KN, Komander D. Ubiquitin modifications. Cell Res . 2016;26:399-422.
115. Lim KL, Lim GG. K63-linked ubiquitination and neurodegeneration. Neurobiol Dis . 2011;43:9-16.
116. Braten O, Livneh I, Ziv T, et al. Numerous proteins with unique characteristics are degraded by the 26S proteasome following monoubiquitination. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 2016;113:E4639-E4647.
117. Tan JM, Wong ES, Kirkpatrick DS, et al. Lysine 63-linked ubiquitination promotes the formation and autophagic clearance of protein inclusions associated with neurodegenerative diseases. Hum Mol Genet . 2008;17:431-439.
118. PuangmalaiN,SenguptaU,BhattN,etal.Lysine63-linkedubiquitination of tau oligomers contributes to the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease. J Biol Chem . 2022;298:101766.
119. Zhang M, Windheim M, Roe SM, et al. Chaperoned ubiquitylationcrystal structures of the CHIP U box E3 ubiquitin ligase and a CHIPUbc13-Uev1a complex. Mol Cell . 2005;20:525-538.
120. Lu K, den Brave F, Jentsch S. Receptor oligomerization guides pathway choice between proteasomal and autophagic degradation. Nat Cell Biol . 2017;19:732-739.
121. Pohl C, Dikic I. Cellular quality control by the ubiquitin-proteasome system and autophagy. Science . 2019;366:818-822.
122. Falcon B, Noad J, McMahon H, Randow F, Goedert M. Galectin-8mediated selective autophagy protects against seeded tau aggregation. J Biol Chem . 2018;293:2438-2451.
123. Ramesh Babu J, Lamar Seibenhener M, Peng J, et al. Genetic inactivation of p62 leads to accumulation of hyperphosphorylated tau and neurodegeneration. J Neurochem . 2008;106:107-120.
124. Njomen E, Tepe JJ. Proteasome activation as a new therapeutic approach to target proteotoxic disorders. J Med Chem . 2019;62:6469-6481.
125. Deng Z, Dong Y, Zhou X, Lu JH, Yue Z. Pharmacological modulation of autophagy for Alzheimer's disease therapy: opportunities and obstacles. Acta Pharm Sin B . 2022;12:1688-1706.
126. Bekes M, Langley DR, Crews CM. PROTAC targeted protein degraders: the past is prologue. Nat Rev Drug Discov . 2022;21:181200.
127. WengG,CaiX,CaoD,etal. PROTAC-DB 2.0: an updated database of PROTACs. Nucleic Acids Res . 2023;51:D1367-D1372.
128. Zhu B, Zhang T, Jiang Q, et al. Synthesis and evaluation of pyrazine and quinoxaline fluorophores for in vivo detection of cerebral tau tangles in Alzheimer's models. Chem Commun (Camb) . 2018;54:11558-11561.
129. Yao D, Li T, Yu L, et al. Selective degradation of hyperphosphorylated tau by proteolysis-targeting chimeras ameliorates cognitive function in Alzheimer's disease model mice. Front Pharmacol . 2024;15:1351792.
130. Tomoshige S, Nomura S, Ohgane K, Hashimoto Y, Ishikawa M. Discovery of small molecules that induce the degradation of huntingtin. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl . 2017;56:11530-11533.
131. Klunk WE, Wang Y, Huang GF, Debnath ML, Holt DP, Mathis CA. Unchargedthioflavin-T derivatives bind to amyloid-beta protein with high affinity and readily enter the brain. Life Sci . 2001;69:1471-1484.
132. Zhu W, Zhang W, Chen J, Tong Y, Xu F, Pang J. Discovery of effective dual PROTAC degraders for neurodegenerative disease-associated aggregates. J Med Chem . 2024;67:3448-3466.
133. Vagrys D, Davidson J, Chen I, Hubbard RE, Davis B. Exploring IDPligand interactions: tau K18 as a test case. Int J Mol Sci . 2020;21:5257.
134. Pickhardt M, Neumann T, Schwizer D, et al. Identification of small molecule inhibitors of tau aggregation by targeting monomeric tau as a potential therapeutic approach for tauopathies. Curr Alzheimer Res . 2015;12:814-828.
135. Wang W, Zhou Q, Jiang T, et al. A novel small-molecule PROTAC selectively promotes tau clearance to improve cognitive functions in Alzheimer-like models. Theranostics . 2021;11:5279-5295.
136. Chien DT, Bahri S, Szardenings AK, et al. Early clinical PET imaging results with the novel PHF-tau radioligand [F-18]-T807. J Alzheimers Dis . 2013;34:457-468.
137. Kargbo RB. Treatment of Alzheimer's by PROTAC-Tau protein degradation. ACS Med Chem Lett . 2019;10:699-700.
138. Tago T, Furumoto S, Okamura N, et al. Preclinical evaluation of [(18)F]THK-5105 enantiomers: effects of chirality on its effectiveness as a tau imaging radiotracer. Mol Imaging Biol . 2016;18:258266.
139. Liang M, Gu L, Zhang H, et al. Design, synthesis, and bioactivity of novel bifunctional small molecules for Alzheimer's disease. ACS Omega . 2022;7:26308-26315.
140. Maccioni RB, Rivas CI, Vera JC. Differential interaction of synthetic peptides from the carboxyl-terminal regulatory domain of tubulin with microtubule-associated proteins. EMBOJ . 1988;7:1957-1963.
141. Rivas CI, Vera JC, Maccioni RB. Anti-idiotypic antibodies that react with microtubule-associated proteins are present in the sera of rabbits immunized with synthetic peptides from tubulin's regulatory domain. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 1988;85:6092-6096.
142. HymelHC,AndersonJC,LiuD,GauthierTJ,MelvinAT.Incorporating a beta-hairpin sequence motif to increase intracellular stability of a peptide-based PROTAC. Biochem Eng J . 2023;199:109063.
143. Chu TT, Gao N, Li QQ, et al. Specific knockdown of endogenous tau protein by peptide-directed ubiquitin-proteasome degradation. Cell ChemBiol . 2016;23:453-461.

144. Gong B, Zhang W, Cong W, et al. Systemic administration of neurotransmitter-derived Lipidoids-PROTACs-DNA nanocomplex promotes tau clearance and cognitive recovery for Alzheimer's disease therapy. Adv Healthc Mater . 2024;13:e2400149.
145. Lu M, Liu T, Jiao Q, et al. Discovery of a Keap1-dependent peptide PROTAC to knockdown Tau by ubiquitination-proteasome degradation pathway. Eur J Med Chem . 2018;146:251-259.
146. Wilson DM, 3rd, Cookson MR, Van Den Bosch L, Zetterberg H, Holtzman DM, Dewachter I. Hallmarks of neurodegenerative diseases. Cell . 2023;186:693-714.
147. Zbinden A, Perez-Berlanga M, De Rossi P, Polymenidou M. Phase separation and neurodegenerative diseases: a disturbance in the force. Dev Cell . 2020;55:45-68.
148. Stroo E, Koopman M, Nollen EA, Mata-Cabana A. Cellular regulation of amyloid formation in aging and disease. Front Neurosci . 2017;11:64.
149. Abounit S, Wu JW, Duff K, Victoria GS, Zurzolo C. Tunneling nanotubes: a possible highway in the spreading of tau and other prionlike proteins in neurodegenerative diseases. Prion . 2016;10:344-351.
150. Moussaud S, Jones DR, Moussaud-Lamodiere EL, Delenclos M, Ross OA, McLean PJ. Alpha-synuclein and tau: teammates in neurodegeneration? Mol Neurodegener . 2014;9:43.
151. Troup RI, Fallan C, Baud MGJ. Current strategies for the design of PROTAC linkers: a critical review. Explor Target Antitumor Ther . 2020;1:273-312.
152. Jones DT, Knopman DS, Graff-Radford J, et al. In vivo (18)F-AV-1451 tau PET signal in MAPT mutation carriers varies by expected tau isoforms. Neurology . 2018;90:e947-e954.
153. Cantrill C, Chaturvedi P, Rynn C, Petrig Schaffland J, Walter I, Wittwer MB. Fundamental aspects of DMPK optimization of targeted protein degraders. Drug Discov Today . 2020;25:969-982.
154. Edmondson SD, Yang B, Fallan C. Proteolysis targeting chimeras (PROTACs) in 'beyond rule-of-five' chemical space: recent progress and future challenges. Bioorg Med Chem Lett . 2019;29:1555-1564.
155. Gupta M, Lee HJ, Barden CJ, Weaver DF. The blood-brain barrier (BBB) score. J Med Chem . 2019;62:9824-9836.
156. Apprato G, Poongavanam V, Garcia Jimenez D, et al. Exploring the chemical space of orally bioavailable PROTACs. Drug Discov Today . 2024;29:103917.
157. Pike A, Williamson B, Harlfinger S, Martin S, McGinnity DF. Optimising proteolysis-targeting chimeras (PROTACs) for oral drug delivery: a drug metabolism and pharmacokinetics perspective. Drug Discov Today . 2020;25:1793-800.
158. Scott JS, Michaelides IN, Schade M. Property-based optimisation of PROTACs. RSC Med Chem . 2025;16:449-456.
159. Ruffilli C, Roth S, Rodrigo M, Boyd H, Zelcer N, Moreau K. Proteolysis targeting chimeras (PROTACs): a perspective on integral membrane protein degradation. ACS Pharmacol Transl Sci . 2022;5:849-858.
160. Lee AC, Harris JL, Khanna KK, Hong JH. A comprehensive review on current advances in peptide drug development and design. Int J Mol Sci . 2019;20:2383.
161. Wilson AJ, Kerns JK, Callahan JF, Moody CJ. Keap calm, and carry on covalently. J Med Chem . 2013;56:7463-7476.
162. Ji CH, Kim HY, Lee MJ, et al. The AUTOTAC chemical biology platform for targeted protein degradation via the autophagy-lysosome system. Nat Commun . 2022;13:904.
163. Ji CH, Lee MJ, Kim HY, et al. Targeted protein degradation via the autophagy-lysosome system: AUTOTAC (AUTOphagy-TArgeting Chimera). Autophagy . 2022;18:2259-2262.
164. Wagner J, Ryazanov S, Leonov A, et al. Anle138b: a novel oligomer modulator for disease-modifying therapy of neurodegenerative diseases such as prion and Parkinson's disease. Acta Neuropathol . 2013;125:795-813.
165. Miller LVC, Papa G, Vaysburd M, et al. Co-opting templated aggregation to degrade pathogenic tau assemblies and improve motor function. Cell . 2024;187:5967-5980.e17.
166. Zeng J, Santos AF, Mukadam AS, et al. Target-induced clustering activates Trim-Away of pathogens and proteins. Nat Struct Mol Biol . 2021;28:278-289.
167. Benn J, Cheng S, Keeling S, et al. Aggregate-selective removal of pathological tau by clustering-activated degraders. Science . 2024;385:1009-1016.
168. Dupre E, Danis C, Arrial A, et al. Single domain antibody fragments as new tools for the detection of neuronal tau protein in cells and in mice studies. ACS Chem Neurosci . 2019;10:3997-4006.
169. Arjomandnejad M, Dasgupta I, Flotte TR, Keeler AM. Immunogenicity of recombinant adeno-associated virus (AAV) vectors for gene transfer. BioDrugs . 2023;37:311-329.
170. Li W, Bengtson MH, Ulbrich A, et al. Genome-wide and functional annotation of human E3 ubiquitin ligases identifies MULAN, a mitochondrial E3 that regulates the organelle's dynamics and signaling. PLoS One . 2008;3:e1487.
171. Dewson G, Eichhorn PJA, Komander D. Deubiquitinases in cancer. Nat Rev Cancer . 2023;23:842-862.
172. Akizuki Y, Morita M, Mori Y, et al. cIAP1-based degraders induce degradation via branched ubiquitin architectures. Nat Chem Biol . 2023;19:311-322.
173. Paudel RR, Lu D, Roy Chowdhury S, Monroy EY, Wang J. Targeted protein degradation via lysosomes. Biochemistry . 2023;62:564-579.
174. XiaoY,WeiL,SuJ,etal.Ataudephosphorylation-targetingchimeraselectively recruits protein phosphatase-1 to ameliorate Alzheimer's disease and tauopathies. Cell Chem Biol . 2024;31:1787-1799.e6.
175. Hu Z, Chen PH, Li W, et al. Targeted dephosphorylation of Tau by phosphorylation targeting chimeras (PhosTACs) as a therapeutic modality. J Am Chem Soc . 2023;145:4045-4055.
176. Zheng J, Tian N, Liu F, et al. A novel dephosphorylation targeting chimera selectively promoting tau removal in tauopathies. Signal Transduct Target Ther . 2021;6:269.
177. AlonsoAdelC,LiB,Grundke-IqbalI,IqbalK.Polymerizationofhyperphosphorylated tau into filaments eliminates its inhibitory activity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 2006;103:8864-8869.
178. Niewiadomska G, Niewiadomski W, Steczkowska M, Gasiorowska A. Tau oligomers neurotoxicity. Life (Basel) . 2021;11:28.
179. Therriault J, Schindler SE, Salvado G, et al. Biomarker-based staging of Alzheimer disease: rationale and clinical applications. Nat Rev Neurol . 2024;20:232-244.
180. Arnold C. PROTAC protein degraders to drug the undruggable enter phase 3 trials. Nat Med . 2024;30(11):3030-3031.

## SUPPORTING INFORMATION

Additional supporting information can be found online in the Supporting Information section at the end of this article.

Howtocite this article: WangL, Sooram B, Kumar R, Schedin-Weiss S, Tjernberg LO, Winblad B. Tau degradation in Alzheimer's disease: Mechanisms and therapeutic opportunities. Alzheimer's Dement . 2025;21:e70048. https://doi.org/10.1002/alz.70048