## Current Topics

## Frontiers in Alzheimer's and Dementia Research

## Review

## Anti-amyloidβ Antibodies and Anti-tau Therapies for Alzheimer's Disease: Recent Advances and Perspectives

Naoyuki Suzuki,* , a Takuya Hatta, b Mana Ito, b and Ken-ichi Kusakabe a a Laboratory for Medicinal Chemistry Research, Shionogi Pharmaceutical Research Center, 3-1-1 Futaba-cho, Toyonaka, Osaka 561-0825, Japan: and b Laboratory for Drug Discovery &amp; Disease Research, Shionogi Pharmaceutical Research Center, 3-1-1 Futaba-cho, Toyonaka, Osaka 561-0825, Japan.

*  Correspondence: naoyuki.suzuki@shionogi.co.jp

Received January 26, 2024

Amyloidβ (A β )  plaques  and  neurofibrillary  tangles  containing  phosphorylated  tau  protein  are  major hallmarks of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Drug discovery efforts to target A β and  tau  have  been  the  primary focus for several decades. Recently, substantial breakthroughs have been achieved in the clinical development of A β antibodies; aducanumab was approved under conditional accelerated pathway by Food and Drug Ad -ministration (FDA) in the U.S. as the first disease-modifying agent for treating AD, and lecanemab has been granted traditional full approved in the U.S. and Japan. In addition, donanemab met the primary endpoint in  a  phase  3  study.  On  the  other  hand,  tau-targeting  therapies  have  failed  to  show  clinical  benefit  although that increased tau levels show a strong correlation with cognitive impairment relative to A β depositions. Currently, tau immunotherapies, such as anti-tau antibodies and tau vaccines, have shown functional benefits in clinical trials. Also, clinical trials for combination therapy of A β and tau antibodies to see their potential are being  investigated.  In  this  review,  we  provide  updates  on  the  results  of  clinical  trials  of  anti-A β antibodies and anti-tau therapeutics and suggest future directions for these therapeutics.

Key words Alzheimer's disease, amyloid- β , tau, antibody

## 1. Introduction

Alzheimer's disease (AD), the most common  case of dementia,  accounting  for  50-70%  of  cases,  is  a  progressive neurodegenerative  disease  characterized  by  decline  of  cognition and memory. The number of people living with dementia worldwide  was  estimated  to  be  55  million  in  2019,  and  the numbers  are  expected  to  reach  139  million  in  2050,  with two-thirds of those affected living in low- and middle-income countries.  The  economic  costs  associated  with  dementia  are formidable  and  are  estimated  to  more  than  double  from  1.3 trillion dollars per year in 2019 to 2.8 trillion dollars in 2030. 1) Amyloidβ (A β )  plaques  and  neurofibrillary  tangles  (NFTs) containing  phosphorylated  tau  protein  are  the  hallmarks  of AD.  Research  on  longitudinal  biomarkers  has  shown  that A β accumulation  starts  decades  before  the  onset  of  clinical symptoms followed by the spread of NFTs, which then causes neuronal  and  synaptic  loss  leading  to  cognitive  impairment. 2) Numerous  accounts  of  preclinical  and  clinical  evidence  suggest that the A β cascade and the hyperphosphorylation of tau play  major  roles  in  AD  pathogenesis. 3) Therefore,  targeting A β or  tau  have  been  the  primary  focuses  for  several  decades via multiple  approaches. 4,5) In  A β -targeted  approaches,  substantial  breakthroughs  have  been  made  with  A β antibodies.

<!-- image -->

Indeed,  aducanumab was approved under conditional accelerated pathway by Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in the U.S.  as  the  first  disease-modifying  agent  for  treating  AD, 6) and  lecanemab  have  been  granted  traditional  full  approval  in the  U.S.  and  Japan. 7,8) In  addition,  donanemab  was  reported to  meet  the  primary  endpoint  in  a  phase  3  study,  providing clinical benefits for some clinical scales and biomarkers, such as A β plaques and tau, which should accelerate the path to its approval. 9) Regarding  tau,  although  clinical  studies  of  many candidates  had  to  be  discontinued  due  to  lack  of  efficacy  or toxicity,  recent  progress  in  tau-targeting  therapies  is  evident but  without  successful  translation  into  clinical  benefits.  The aim of this review is to highlight recent advances and perspectives on anti-A β antibodies and anti-tau therapeutics.

## 2. Anti-A β Antibodies

2.1. The Amyloid Oligomer Hypothesis In 1992, based on  the  finding  of  a  pathogenic  mutation  in  the  A β precursor protein (APP) gene from familial Alzheimer's disease patients, Hardy  and  Higgins  formulated  the  amyloid  hypothesis  that brain A β plaque deposition could be the main pathogenic factor  of  AD. 10) The  A β formation  begins  with  APP  cleavage  by β -site  amyloid  precursor  protein  cleaving  enzyme  1  (BACE1)

©  2024  Author(s)  This  is  an  open  access  article  distributed  under  the  terms  of  Creative  Commons  Attribution  4.0  License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/). Published by The Pharmaceutical Society of Japan

to  generate  a  soluble  extracellular  fragment  (sAPP β )  and  a cell-membrane-bound  fragment  (C99).  Next,  C99  is  cleaved intracellularly  by γ -secretase,  yielding  an  amyloid  intracellular  domain  and  A β peptides  of  variable  lengths 11) (Fig.  1).  Of these A β peptides,  A β 42 having 42 amino acids is thought to be crucial for AD pathology, as it is more toxic and aggregates more easily than other forms. A β monomers aggregate to form various  species,  such  as  oligomers,  consisting  of  soluble  low molecular weight oligomers, protofibrils, and insoluble fibrils, ultimately forming A β plaques  (Fig.  2).  Although  A β plaques were  believed  to  be  the  pathogenic  form  of  A β ,  a  growing amount  of  pharmacological  evidence  suggests  that  A β oligomers,  especially  soluble  low  molecular  weight  oligomers  and protofibrils,  are  the  most  likely  pathogenic  form  of  AD. 12) In particular,  severity  of  cognitive  dysfunction  in  AD  patients was found to correlate better with the level of soluble A β species  than  insoluble  A β species  in  the  brains. 13,14) In  addition, the  selective  toxicity  of  A β oligomers  observed  in  cellular assays  further  supported  the  oligomer  hypothesis.  Several mechanisms, such as direct neurotoxicity via ion channel pore formation  or  receptor  binding  to  activate  signaling  pathways, are  considered  to  induce  neuronal  loss  and  cognitive  decline by  A β oligomers. 15) Finally,  recent  advances  achieved  by  the three  monoclonal  antibodies  of  aducanumab,  lecanemab  and donanemab  offer  support  for  the  amyloid  cascade  being  a pathogenesis  pathway  to  AD.  We  provide  updates  on  the  research and development of these three antibodies.

2.2. Aducanumab Aducanumab  was  originally  discovered

Fig.  1. The Process of A β Formation

<!-- image -->

by  scientists  at  Neurimmune  and  then  licensed  to  Biogen  and Eisai  for  clinical  development.  It  is  a  recombinant  human  antibody  derived  from  a  blood  lymphocyte  library  collected  from healthy elderly donors without signs of cognitive impairment. Importantly, the immune system of the donors successfully resisted AD,  and  therefore  the  antibody  from  their  blood  samples  could serve  as  potential  therapeutics  through  a  reverse  translational medical  approach. 16) Binding  kinetics  and  affinity  measurement studies confirmed that aducanumab selectively targeted A β oligomers. 17)

Two  phase  3  studies  (EMERGE  and  ENGAGE)  of  aducanumab  showed  discrepancy regarding efficacy of  slow -ing  cognitive  decline. 18) While  EMERGE  met  the  primary endpoint of the Clinical  Dementia  Rating-Sum  of  Boxes (CDR-SB), where the highest  dose  (10 mg/kg,  every  4  weeks) of  aducanumab  led  to  significant  reduction  in  the  CDR-SB score by about 20% in patients with early AD (mild cognitive impairment  (MCI)  due  to  AD  and  mild  AD  dementia)  at  78 weeks,  ENGAGE  did  not  meet  the  primary  endpoint.  However,  aducanumab  consistently  showed  significant  A β plaque clearance in the brain (amyloid Positron Emission Tomography (PET):  about  70%  decrease  in  EMERGE  and  about  59%  decrease  in  ENGAGE)  and  phosphorylated  tau  reduction  in  the plasma (surrogate biomarker of NFTs in the brain: about 13% decrease  in  EMERGE  and  about  16%  decrease  in  ENGAGE) in the both studies. These finding suggested that both A β and tau  could  influence  each  other,  and  A β immunotherapy could improve tau pathology. The most common adverse effect was amyloid  related  imaging  abnormalities  (ARIA;  ARIA-E:  suggestive  of  vasogenic  edema  and  sulcal  effusions;  ARIA-H: suggestive  of  hemosiderin  deposits).  These  occurred  in  about 35% of the treated patients in both studies at the highest dose.

Regulatory authorities in the U.S., EU and Japan responded differently  to  aducanumab.  The  FDA  approved  aducanumab under the agency's accelerated approval pathway in 2021. 6) Although the results of the two phase 3 studies were inconsistent with respect to efficacy of slowing cognitive decline, the FDA has  determined  that  there  is  substantial  evidence  that  aducanumab consistently reduces A β plaques in the brain and that the  reduction  in  these  plaques  is  reasonably  likely  to  predict important  benefits  to  patients.  On  the  other  hand,  European Medicines Agency (EMA) and Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare  (MHLW) in Japan rejected marketing application for aducanumab. 19,20) These  authorities  have  concluded  that  the link between reduction of A β plaques in the brain and slowing cognitive decline had not been established in the two phase 3

Fig.  2. General Aggregation Scheme of A β from Monomers to Plaque

<!-- image -->

studies,  and  the  benefits  of  aducanumab  did  not  outweigh  the risk of ARIAs.

Later,  Biogen announced that it would stop marketing aducanumab and terminate phase 4 study (ENVISION) to verify clinical  benefit  of  aducanumab,  due  to  realigning  resources for  AD franchise at Biogen. 21) The  rights  to  aducanumab will revert to the originator, Neurimmune.

2.3. Lecanemab Lecanemab,  a  humanized  form  of  the mAb158 mouse antibody, was originally discovered at Uppsala University  and  is  being  developed  by  Eisai  and  Biogen.  This antibody  was  designed  to  preferentially  capture  A β protofi -brils. 22) The  rationale  came  from  the  pathology  of  Swedishtype inheritable AD (Arctic mutation), 23) where carriers of the Arctic mutation (E693G in APP) showed decreased A β monomer levels in plasma but enhanced formation of protofibrils in the  brain.  The  evidence  suggested  that  A β protofibrils  could be  a  primary  pathogenic  form  of  AD,  and  antibodies  targeting  protofibrils  might  have  superior  therapeutic  properties. In  a  large  phase  3  study  (Clarity  AD)  for  early  AD  patients, a  10  mg/kg  dose  of  lecanemab  every  2  weeks  reduced  A β plaques by about 60% based on the amyloid PET study and resulted in a significant reduction in the CDR-SB score by 27% at 18 months. Secondary endpoints also reflected the CDR-SB scores thus slowing cognitive decline or improving functional measures. ARIAs were observed in about 20% of the patients, which were higher frequency among apolipoprotein E (ApoE) ε 4  carriers  and  patients  with  microhemorrhage  in  the  brains. The  occurrence  of  ARIAs  in  lecanemab  was  less  than  those observed  in  aducanumab. 8) Like  aducanumab,  phosphorylated tau related biomarkers were significantly reduced. 24) Based on these  promising  findings,  lecanemab  was  granted  traditional approval  by  the  FDA  as  a  treatment  for  AD  in  July  2023. 7) Also, lecanemab has been approved by the MHLW in Japan as a treatment for slowing progression of MCI and mild dementia due to AD. 8)

a  significant  reduction  of  A β plaques  in  the  brain  by  about 80%  based  on  amyloid  PET  imaging  and  reduced  the  CDRSB  score  by  35%  compared  with  the  placebo  at  18  months (700 mg  for  the  first  three  doses  and  1400 mg  thereafter  at every  4  weeks).  Also,  significant  reduction  in  phosphory -lated tau related biomarkers was observed. During the phase 3 study, treatment related ARIAs were frequent and observed in about 35% of the patients, 9) which was similar to or less than those  observed  in  aducanumab. 6) The  data  encouraged  the start  of  global  regulatory submissions, and Eli Lilly has completed  submission  for  full  approval  to  the  FDA  in  July  2023 and the MHLW in September 2023. 28,29)

2.4. Donanemab Donanemab  is  a  humanized  antibody with  selective  affinity  to  N-terminally  truncated  and  pyroglu -tamate-modified  A β (A β pE3).  A  part  of  the  A β monomer  is subjected  to  N-  and/or  C-terminal  modification,  and  A β pE3 was  identified  in  sufficient  quantities  as  an  N-truncated  A β variant  in  A β plaques  derived  from  postmortem  AD  brains, indicating that A β pE3 could be a pathogenetic form of AD. 25) Thus,  donanemab  was  designed  to  remove  existing  A β burdens  in  the  brain.  A β pE3  peptides  are  also  known  to  form stable  and  soluble  oligomers  and  induced  neurodegeneration in  AD  mouse  models. 26) Eli  Lilly  announced  a  positive  find -ing  for  donanemab  in  a  phase  3  study, 27) where  it  showed

2.5. Future Directions for A β Antibodies Solanezumab,  selectively  targeting  A β monomers,  failed  to  reduce A β plaques  and  slow  cognitive  decline  in  a  phase  3  study, 30) most  likely  because  monomers  might  not  be  the  right  target among  the  A β species.  Indeed,  A β monomers  were  reported to be physiologically important but not a pathological form of AD. 31) On the other hand, there were several clinically inves -tigated antibodies having high affinity for A β oligomers, other than  aducanumab and lecanemab; however, all of them failed to  show  clinical  benefits 4) (Table  1).  For  example,  bapineu -zumab  and  gantenerumab  can  bind  a  broad  range  of  the  A β species, 17,32) and crenezumab has preferential affinity for A β oligomers  as  well  as  A β monomers. 33) A  plausible  reason  for such  unsatisfactory  clinical  outcomes  could  be  a  competitive binding with A β monomers. Indeed, A β monomers exist abundantly  in  both  the  brain  and  its  periphery,  and  most  of  such antibodies  can  be  captured  by  these  monomers,  which  would lead to a significant decrease in efficacy levels over A β oligomers. 34) Taken together, high selectivity for A β oligomers with low affinity for monomers appear to be a crucial profile for an A β antibody to be useful for AD therapeutics. As noted above, soluble  oligomers  of  A β exhibited  selective  toxicity  in  cells and  could  be  involved  in  AD  pathogenesis,  which  is  also  the basis for suggesting that A β oligomers are one of the primary targets for A β antibodies.

Peripheral  administration  is  not  conductive  to  delivering an  antibody  to  the  brain  at  a  sufficiently  high  dose  due  to low  blood-brain  barrier  (BBB)  penetration  (approx.  0.1%  of injected  dose  in  general). 35) Therefore,  antibodies  engineering  to  achieve  enhanced  BBB  crossing  have  been  attracting. Such  engineered  antibodies  are  expected  to  improve  clinical efficacy and reduce dosages, which could contribute to amelio -rating side effects, such as ARIAs. 36) One example to achieve high BBB penetration is Denali's Antibody Transport Vehicle (ATV) technology.  The  transferrin  receptor  is  responsible  for

Table  1. Representative A β Antibodies Investigated in Clinical Study (As of 10 January, 2024)

| Drug         | Company                       | Target A β species        | Patient population   | Outcome                  |
|--------------|-------------------------------|---------------------------|----------------------|--------------------------|
| Solanezumab  | Eli Lilly                     | Monomer                   | Mild to moderate AD  | Lack of efficacy         |
| Bapinezumab  | Elan/Pfizer/Johrnson&Johrnson | Monomer, oligomer, plaque | Mild to moderate AD  | Lack of efficacy         |
| Gantenerumab | Hoffman LaRoche               | Monomer, oligomer, plaque | Mild to moderate AD  | Lack of efficacy         |
| Crenezumab   | AC Immune/Hoffman LaRoche     | Monomer, oligomer         | MCI to mild AD       | Lack of efficacy         |
| Aducanumab   | Biogen/Eisai                  | Oligomer                  | MCI to mild AD       | Slowed cognitive decline |
| Lecanemab    | Biogen/Eisai                  | Oligomer (protofibril)    | MCI to mild AD       | Slowed cognitive decline |
| Donanemab    | Eli Lilly                     | Oligomer (A β pE3)        | MCI to mild AD       | Slowed cognitive decline |

MCI: mild cognitive impairment due to AD. Progression of AD: preclinical AD → MCI → mild AD → moderate AD → severe AD.

the transport of iron into the brain to maintain iron homeostasis.  Therefore, an antibody with a transferrin receptor 1-binding  domain  can  bind  to  receptors  on  endothelial  cells,  which enables to penetrate the BBB through active receptor-mediated transport 37) (Fig. 3). Biogen announced the leveraging of ATV technology  to  develop  next  generation  A β antibodies  to  increase brain exposure along with reduced ARIAs. 38) Eisai also announced  that  they  are  investigating  the  application  of  their original  brain  transport  technology  to  develop  the  next-generation  lecanamab. 39) Likewise,  Roche  developed  the  Brainshuttle  technology  in  which  a  Fab  antibody  fragment  can  bind transferrin receptor 1. Indeed, their new antibody trontinemab, gantenerumab  with  the  Brainshuttle,  improved  BBB  crossing  and  cleared  A β plaques  with  fewer  ARIAs. 40) Detailed investigations  on  brain-penetrating  A β antibodies  using  such technologies  could  help  understand  the  mechanism  behind ARIAs  along  with  significant  reduction  in  dosage,  thus  pro -viding affordable treatment options for AD. If a low dose and brain-penetrating  A β antibody  can  be  confirmed  to  be  safe, long-acting injection formulation may be used to increase the convenience of patients and caregivers.

The  adverse  effects  of  ARIAs  shown  above  and  issues  on the affordability of A β antibodies 41) encourage reconsideration of small molecule inhibitors for the two enzymes, BACE1 and γ -secretase  responsible  for  A β production (Fig. 1), as main -tenance  therapy  after  treatment  with  A β antibodies,  once  A β plaques or oligomers have been cleared. 42,43) All  clinical  trials on BACE1 inhibitors were discontinued due to the occurrence

TfRl:Transferrinreceptor-1

<!-- image -->

Fig.  3. Overview of Denali's Antibody Transport Vehicle

of  adverse  events,  which  include  cognitive  impairment  likely derived  from  the  cleavage  of  other  substrates,  particularly SEZ6  that  is  involved  in  synaptic  plasticity. 44,45) However, BACE1 inhibitors having selectivity  over  BACE2  could  ameliorate  this  adverse  event. 46,47) Modulators  of γ -secretase  are also being reconsidered as they can curb the Notch-interfering ability  of γ -secretase  inhibitors.  Indeed,  scientists  at  Roche reported  on  RG6289,  which  inhibited  A β 40  and  A β 42  production  without  affecting  total  A β production  and  showed  a safe  profile  with  only  mild  adverse  events.  On  the  basis  of the  promising  profiles  observed  in  the  phase  1  study,  Roche plans  to  initiate  a  phase  2  study. 44) Clinical  trials  to  confirm the  potential  of  maintenance  therapy  with  BACE1  inhibitors and γ -secretase  modulators  should  be  considered  to  provide another option for patients and caregivers to address the issues of immunotherapy.

## 3. Anti-tau Therapies for AD

3.1. The  Tau  Hypothesis Tau  is  a  microtubule-associated  protein  encoded  by  the  microtubule-associated  protein tau  (MAPT) gene,  which  is  abundant  in  the  brain. 48,49) There are  six  tau  isoforms  in  the  adult  human  brain,  which  are  differentially  expressed  during  development. 50) Physiologically, tau plays a key role in maintaining the structure and stability of  neuronal  axons.  In  dendrites,  it  supports  the  spine  remodeling  necessary  for  synaptic  plasticity. 51) The  physiological functions  of  tau  are  modulated  by  the  proper  maintenance  of modifications such as phosphorylation and acetylation. On the other  hand,  when  excessive  modifications  occur,  tau  loses  its ability  to  bind  to  microtubules,  undergoes  structural  changes, and  forms  aggregates  and  neurofibrillary  tangles  containing NFTs 52) (Fig.  4).  NFTs  are  a  major  pathological  hallmark  of AD, in which tau fibrillates and deposits in the cytoplasm, 52,53) resulting  in  microtubule  destabilization,  impairment  of  synaptic function and morphology, and neurodegeneration. 54) Importantly,  the  presence  of  tau  is  required  for  A β -induced neurotoxicity  and  cognitive  dysfunction. 55,56) Likewise,  associations between the onset of AD symptoms and the development of NFTs were found in clinical situations.  For  example, asymptomatic  subjects  with  A β accumulation  (amyloid  PET positive)  but  not  NFTs  (tau  PET  negative)  did  not  show  cog -nitive  decline  over  at  least  3  to  5  years,  while  asymptomatic subjects who were both amyloid and tau PET positive showed continuously cognitive worsening. 57) More importantly, tau aggregation  correlates  well  with  cognitive  deficit, 58) suggesting

Fig.  4. General Aggregation Scheme of Tau

<!-- image -->

Table  2. Tau-Targeted Drugs (As of 10 January, 2024)

| Drug name   | Company                        | Molecule type             | Mechanism of action       | Patient population                                           | Trial phase                        |
|-------------|--------------------------------|---------------------------|---------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------|
| Tideglusib  | Noscira                        | Small molecule            | GSK3 β inhibitor          | Mild to moderate AD                                          | Terminated due to lack of efficacy |
| LY3372689   | Eli Lilly                      | Small molecule            | O-GlcNacase inhibitor     | Early AD                                                     | Phase II, ongoing                  |
| TRx0237     | TauRx Therapeutics             | Small molecule            | Aggregation inhibitor     | Mild to moderate AD                                          | Phase III, ongoing                 |
| E2814       | Eisai                          | Antibody                  | Inhibition of tau protein | Early onset Alzheimer's disease caused by a genetic mutation | Phase II/III, ongoing              |
| Bepranemab  | Hoffmann-La Roche /UCB         | Antibody                  | Inhibition of tau protein | MCI to mild AD                                               | Phase II, ongoing                  |
| PRX005      | Bristol-Myers Squibb/ Prothena | Antibody                  | Inhibition of tau protein |                                                              | Phase I, ongoing                   |
| Gosuranemab | Biogen                         | Antibody                  | Inhibition of tau protein | MCI to mild AD                                               | Terminated due to lack of efficacy |
| Semorinemab | Hoffmann-La Roche /AC Immune   | Antibody                  | Inhibition of tau protein | MCI to mild AD                                               | Terminated due to lack of efficacy |
| Tilavonemab | AbbVie                         | Antibody                  | Inhibition of tau protein | Early AD                                                     | Terminated due to lack of efficacy |
| Zagotenemab | Eli Lilly                      | Antibody                  | Inhibition of tau protein | Early AD                                                     | Terminated due to lack of efficacy |
| AADvac1     | Axon Neuroscience              | Vaccine                   | Inhibition of tau protein | Mild AD                                                      | Phase II, completed                |
| ACI-35030   | AC Immune                      | Vaccine                   | Inhibition of tau protein | Early AD                                                     | Phase I/II, ongoing                |
| BIIB-080    | Biogen                         | Antisense oligonucleotide | Reduction of tau protein  | MCI to early AD                                              | Phase II, ongoing                  |
| NIO-752     | Novartis                       | Antisense oligonucleotide | Reduction of tau protein  | Early AD                                                     | Phase I, ongoing                   |

MCI: mild cognitive impairment due to AD.

tau aggregation could be a pathological cascade of AD, or A β and  tau  could  work  in  an  integrated  manner  to  progress  AD pathology. 59) Considering these points, tau-targeting therapeutics  have  been  actively  developed  to  slow  or  halt  the  progression  of  AD  (Table  2).  In  this  review,  we  provide  updates  on small  molecules  such  as  tau  modification  and  aggregation  in -hibitors, immunotherapies, and antisense oligonucleotides that have advanced into clinical development.

- 3.2. Tau  Modification  Inhibitors In AD,  the physiological  function  of  tau  is  thought  to  be  lost  when  it  undergoes  excessive  post-translational  modifications. 50) Therefore, several modification inhibitors have been developed. For example,  small  molecules  targeting  glycogen  synthase  kinase 3 β (GSK3 β )  have  been  well  investigated.  GSK3 β is  involved in tau hyperphosphorylation and promoting tau aggregation. 60) One  GSK3 β inhibitor,  tideglusib,  was  found  to  be  safe  and prevented  brain  volume  loss  in  a  phase  2  trial  but  did  not meet  the  primary  endpoint  for  cognitive  function. 61) Several companies have pursued GSK3 β inhibitors,  but  no  compound is currently in clinical development. 62) O-GlcNAcase is the en -zyme responsible for the hydrolysis of the O-linked β -N -acetyl glucosamine  (O-GlcNAc),  and  O-GlcNAc  inhibitors  are  in clinical  trial  by  several  companies  to  intervene  in  the  posttranslational  modification  of  tau.  Because  O-GlcNAcylation and  phosphorylation  can  crosstalk via tau  protein, 63) the  predominance  of  tau  O-GlcNAcylation  by  O-GlcNAcase  inhibi -tors is considered to prevent hyperphosphorylation. 64) At present, LY3372689 is the only compound in phase 2 trials, where safety, tolerability, and efficacy are being investigated. 65)
- 3.3. Tau  Aggregation  Inhibitors When  tau  undergoes modifications  such  as  phosphorylation  and  acetylation,  it  is thought to form aggregates which leads to neurodegeneration. The  tau  protein  aggregation  inhibitor  TRx0237,  also  known as methylene blue, is currently in the clinic. 66) Methylene blue reduced  aggregates  and  ameliorated  deficits  in  a  variety  of behavioral  phenotypes  in  two  tau  preclinical  models. 67) More recently,  a  compound  preventing  the  early  stages  of  tau  aggregation was discovered, and a phase 1 trial is underway. 68,69)
- 3.4. Immunotherapies Tau aggregates in cells are considered  to  cause  neurodegeneration,  and  some  tau  species

are  known  to  spread  among  cells via different  cell  types  and pathways. 70) Immunotherapies  targeting  to  the  prevention  of tau  seeding  and  propagation  have  been  investigated.  Indeed, regarding  passive  immunization,  antibodies  against  various epitopes  have  been  advanced.  Unfortunately,  multiple  antibodies  targeting  the  N-terminal  epitope  have  failed  to  show clinical  benefit. 71-73) Recently,  the  microtubule  binding  region (MTBR)-tau has been found to correlate well with AD pathology  and  clinical  progression. 74) Antibodies  targeting  MTBRtau inhibited seed  aggregation  in  cellular assays  and  tau accumulation  in  mice  injected  with  brain  extracts  from  AD patients. 75,76) Increasing  evidence  on  MTBR-tau  provided  the opportunity  to  initiate  efforts  on  exploring  antibodies  target -ing  MTBR-tau.  A  major  advancement  has  been  the  development of E2814, a MTBR-tau antibody discovered as part of a collaboration  between  University  College  London  and  Eisai, E2814  showed  target  engagement  with  tau  in  the  CSF,  with no  significant  adverse  events  related  to  the  drug  being  ob -served. 77) E2814 was chosen to be evaluated in the Dominantly Inherited  Alzheimer  Network  Trials  Unit  (DIAN-TU),  investigating  both  single  and  combination  therapy  with  lecanemab for asymptomatic and symptomatic participants. 78) Other antibodies  targeting  MTBR  and  nearby  tau,  such  as  PRX005 or  bepranemab,  were  shown  to  be  safe  with  dose-dependent exposure  in  the  plasma  and  CSF,  and  phase  1  and  phase  2 studies are ongoing. On the other hand, clinical trials of many anti-tau  antibodies  missed  their  primary  endpoints,  gosuranemab, semorinemab, tilavonemab, and zagotenemab which can act  in  the  extracellular  region. 74) For  active  immunotherapy (tau vaccine), clinical studies of AADvac1 and ACI-35030 are ongoing, and of particular interest is AADvac1. 68,79) In a phase 2  study,  AADvac1,  designed  to  target  N-terminally  truncated tau, was found to be safe and well tolerated with a significant reduction  in  blood  neurofilament  light  chain  (NfL)  levels  and a  tendency  of  a  decline  in  levels  of  total  tau  and  p-tau  in  the CSF.  In  the  clinical  study,  the  whole  analysis  failed  to  show cognitive benefit, while a post  hoc analysis  predicted  positive results for patients with both A β and tau positive. 80)

- 3.5. Antisense  Oligonucleotides Antisense  oligonucleotide  (ASO)  technology  targeting  human  MAPT  mRNA  to

decrease  the  expression  of  tau  also  has  therapeutic  potential. Two  ASOs  BIIB080  and  NIO752  were  tested  for  effects  on AD. 81,82) In  non-clinical  studies,  BIIB080  inhibited  tau  aggregation in cellular assays, reduced mRNA and protein levels in transgenic mice, and suppressed neurodegeneration and cognitive decline. 83) In a phase 1b study, BIIB080 reduced both CSF tau  and  tau  aggregation. 84) Also,  BIIB080  showed  favorable trends  on  cognitive  function,  where  the  CDR-SB  score  of participants in high-dose groups tended to be declined relative to  those  in  low-doses  and  placebo  groups. 85) Further  clinical studies  will  clarify  clinical  benefit  of  BIIB080  for  mild  cog -nitive  impairment  or  mild  dementia  due  to  AD.  Another  tau ASO  NIO752  is  in  phase  1  clinical  studies,  and  the  results have not been disclosed yet.

3.6. Future  Directions  for  Anti-tau  Therapies Many clinical  trials  of  tau  aggregation  inhibitors  have  failed  to show  clinical  benefits,  although  O-GlcNAcase  inhibitors  are in  clinical  testing  to  examine  their  potential.  Targeting  tau aggregation  through  post-translational  modification  might  be inappropriate  as  it  is  difficult  to  selectively  capture  patho -logical forms of tau. A tau ASO has shown a positive trend on cognitive functions along with reduction in biomarkers related to tau, indicating a potential to be anti-tau therapeutics. Also, a  tau  vaccine,  AADvac1,  showed  functional  benefits  in  the clinic  and  is  awaiting  completion  of  a  phase  2  study  to  see whether it can meet the primary endpoint, which would assess the  potential  of  this  approach.  Although  anti-tau  antibodies have  experienced  many  failures,  some  antibodies,  such  as E2814, exhibited functional benefits reducing tau levels. Con -sidering  that  the  failed  antibodies  targeted  N-terminal  fragments, the MTBR region could be a relevant target for anti-tau antibodies.  Nevertheless,  thorough  investigation  on  the  selection  of  the  epitope  should  be  a  key  to  successfully  targeting pathological tau. Tau antibodies also face common challenges with A β antibodies, e.g. ,  crossing the BBB. Although drug-related adverse events are limited with tau antibodies, improved brain penetration is needed to enhance efficacy. Also, clinical studies  must  select  the  suitable  patient  populations  based  on clinical  stages  and  pathogenesis.  Finally,  combination  therapy of  tau  antibodies  with  A β antibodies  could  be  appropriate  as both A β and  tau  are  likely  to  be  involved  in  the  pathogenesis of AD.

## 4. Conclusion and Perspectives

Although  lecanemab,  and  donanemab  have  achieved  remarkable success in the clinical developments for treating AD, their  clinical  effects  for  symptomatic  patients  have  been  rela -tively  moderate. The growing consensus is that more efficient intervention  with  A β antibodies  and  anti-tau  drugs  should  be able to prevent or delay the onset of AD in asymptomatic individuals having A β and tau pathology, because accumulation of  A β plaques  precede  symptom  onset  by  10-20  years.  The National  Institute  on  Aging  and  the  Alzheimer's  Association (NIA-AA)  published  a  draft  of  revised  clinical  guidelines  to recommend  the  diagnosis  and  staging  of  AD  by  abnormalities  on  A β and  tau  biomarkers,  regardless  of  the  presence  or absence  of  cognitive  impairment. 86) Most  of  the  therapeutics have  been  investigated  with  symptomatic  patients  so  far,  and more  clinical  investigations  are  needed  on  A β antibodies  or anti-tau  drugs  for  asymptomatic  (preclinical  AD)  patients. Considering  the  timing  of  accumulation  of  A β and  tau,  it should  lead  to  more  feasible  clinical  trials  in  terms  of  cost, duration,  and  the  number  of  patients.  Indeed,  lecanemab  and donanemab have been in clinical trials for preclinical AD, 87,88) and E2814, a MTBR-tau antibody, will be also investigated for preclinical AD. 89)

As discussed above, selective  targeting  of  A β oligomers  or fibrillar A β plaques, which are the plausible pathogenic forms, and avoiding binding to A β monomers could be keys to functional  and  cognitive  benefits.  Understanding  the  mechanism behind  ARIAs  is  required  to  increase  the  clinical  benefit  of A β antibodies. Regarding tau-targeting therapies, anti-tau antibodies  look  promising  as  they  offer  functional  benefits in  clinical  use.  Like  A β antibodies,  the  choice  of  the  epitope is  important  to  reduce  pathological  tau  leading  to  significant efficacy.  Targeting  the  MTBR  region  could  be  ideal  consider -ing the functional efficacy observed with E2814. The ongoing clinical trials for tau ASOs and tau vaccines should determine their potential. A common challenge for A β and tau antibodies is  crossing  the  BBB  to  increase  both  efficacy  and  safety.  One promising  approach  to  deliver  antibodies  to  the  whole  brain is  a  technology  leveraging  receptor  mediated  active  transport.  Also,  maintenance  therapy  using  BACE1  inhibitors  or γ -secretase  modulators  after  immunotherapy  offers  another treatment  option  to  address  the  issues  of  ARIAs  and  the  affordability of antibodies. Finally, combination of A β antibody with  anti-tau  therapeutics  could  deliver  synergetic  clinical benefits.  Aducanumab,  lecanemab,  and  donanemab  reduced tau or neurofibrillary tangles along with A β plaque reduction, suggesting  the  interplay  between  the  A β and  tau  pathways thus  pointing  to  the  relevance  of  combination  therapy.  The finding  of  the  DIAN-TU  study  to  investigate  combination effects between E2814 and lecanemab are eagerly awaited.

Acknowledgments The authors thank Dr. Takuya Oguma, Dr. Yuto Unoh and Mr. Takaya Izumi for providing invaluable feedback on this manuscript.

Conflict of Interest N. S., T. H., M. I., and K. K. are employees of Shionogi &amp; Co., Ltd.

## References

- 1) Alzheimer's Disease International, 'World Alzheimer Report 2023.': ‹https://www.alzint.org/u/World-Alzheimer-Report-2023.pdf›, cited 10 January, 2024.
- 2) Aisen  P.  S.,  Jimenez-Maggiora  G.  A.,  Rafii  M.,  Walter  S.,  Raman R., Nat. Rev. Neurol. , 18 , 389-399 (2022).
- 3) Roda  A.  R.,  Serra-Mir  G.,  Montoliu-Gaya  L.,  Tiessler  L.,  Villegas S., Neural Regen. Res. , 17 , 1666-1674 (2022).
- 4) Panza F., Lozupone M., Logroscino G., Logroscino G., Imbimbo P. B., Nat. Rev. Neurol. , 15 , 73-88 (2019).
- 5) Congdon E. E., Ji C., Tetlow A. M., Jiang Y., Sigurdsson M. E., Nat. Rev. Neurol. , 19 , 715-736 (2023).
- 6) FDA, 'FDA's Decision to Approve New Treatment for Alzheimer's Disease.':  ‹https://www.fda.gov/drugs/our-perspective/fdas-decisionapprove-new-treatment-alzheimers-disease›, cited 10 January, 2024.
- 7) FDA,  'FDA  Converts  Novel  Alzheimer's  Disease  Treatment  to Traditional Approval.': ‹https://www.fda.gov/news-events/pressannouncements/fda-converts-novel-alzheimers-disease-treatmenttraditional-approval›, cited 10 January, 2024.
- 8) Eisai, 'LEQEMBI ®  Intravenous Infusion (Lecanemab) for the Treatment of Alzheimer's Disease to be Launched in Japan on December 20.':  ‹https://www.eisai.com/news/2023/news202374.html›,  cited  10

- January, 2024.
- 9) Sims J. R., Zimmer J. A., Evans C. D., Lu M., Ardayfio P., Sparks J.,  Wessels A. M., Shcherbinin S., Wang H., Nery E. S. M., Collins E.  C.,  Solomon  P.,  Salloway  S.,  Apostolova  L.  G.,  Hansson  O., Ritchie  C.,  Brooks  D.  A.,  Mintun  M.,  Skovronsky  D.  M., JAMA , 330 , 512-527 (2023).
- 10) Hardy J. A., Higgins G. A., Science , 256 , 184-185 (1992).
- 11) Hampel  H.,  Hardy  J.,  Blennow  K.,  Chen  C.,  Perry  G.,  Kim  S.  H., Villemagne  V.  L.,  Aisen  P.,  Vendruscolo  M.,  Iwatsubo  T.,  Masters C. L., Cho M., Lannfelt L., Cummings L. J., Vergallo A., Mol. Psychiatry , 26 , 5481-5503 (2021).
- 12) Selkoe D. J., Science , 298 , 789-791 (2002).
- 13) McLean C. A., Cherny R. A., Fraser F. W., Fuller S. J., Smith M. J., Beyreuther K., Bush A. I., Masters C. L., Ann. Neurol. , 46 , 860-866 (1999).
- 14) Dickson D. W., Crystal H. A., Bevona C., Honer W., Vincent I., Davies P., Neurobiol. Aging , 16 , 285-298, discussion, 298-304 (1995).
- 15) Cline  E.  N.,  Bicca  M.  A.,  Viola  K.  L.,  Klein  W.  L., J.  Alzheimers Dis. , 64 (s1), S567-S610 (2018).
- 16) Sevigny J., Chiao P., Bussière T., et al. , Nature (London), 537 ,  50-56 (2016).
- 17) Söderberg  L.,  Johannesson  M.,  Nygren  P.,  Laudon  H.,  Eriksson  F., Osswald G., Möller C., Lannfelt L., Neurotherapeutics , 20 , 195-206 (2023).
- 18) Budd Haeberlein S., Aisen P. S., Barkhof F., et al. , J. Prev. Alzheimers Dis. , 2 , 197-210 (2022).
- 19) EMA,  'Refusal  of  the  marketing  authorisation  for  Aduhelm  (aducanumab).'  ‹https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/medicine-qa/ questions-and-answers-refusal-marketing-authorisation-aduhelm-aducanumab\_en.pdf›, cited 10 January, 2024.
- 20) MHLW,  ‹https://www.mhlw.go.jp/content/11121000/000548306.pdf›, cited 10 January, 2024.
- 21) Biogen, 'Biogen to Realign Resources for Alzheimer's Disease Franchise.':  ‹https://investors.biogen.com/news-releases/news-releasedetails/biogen-realign-resources-alzheimers-disease-franchise›, cited 31 January, 2024.
- 22) Ono K., Tsuji M., Int. J. Mol. Sci. , 21 , 952 (2020).
- 23) Nilsberth  C.,  Westlind-Danielsson  A.,  Eckman  C.  B.,  Condron  M. M.,  Axelman  K.,  Forsell  C.,  Stenh  C.,  Luthman  J.,  Teplow  D.  B., Younkin S. G., Näslund J., Lannfelt L., Nat.  Neurosci. , 4 ,  887-893 (2001).
- 24) van Dyck C. H., Swanson C. J., Aisen P., Bateman R. J., Chen C., Gee  M.,  Kanekiyo  M.,  Li  D.,  Reyderman  L.,  Cohen  S.,  Froelich L.,  Katayama  S.,  Sabbagh  M.,  Vellas  B.,  Watson  D.,  Dhadda  S., Irizarry M., Kramer L. D., Iwatsubo T., N. Engl. J. Med. , 388 , 9-21 (2023).
- 25) Saido T., Iwatsubo T., Mann D. M., Shimada H., Ihara Y., Kawashima S., Neuron , 14 , 457-466 (1995).
- 26) Bayer T. A., Mol. Psychiatry , 27 , 1880-1885 (2022).
- 27) Eli  Lilly,  'Lilly's  Donanemab  Significantly  Slowed  Cognitive  and Functional  Decline  in  Phase  3  Study  of  Early  Alzheimer's  Dis -ease.':  ‹https://investor.lilly.com/news-releases/news-release-details/ lillys-donanemab-significantly-slowed-cognitive-and-functional›, cited 10 January, 2024.
- 28) Formulary  Watch,  'FDA  Decision  on  Donanemab  for  Alzheimer's Expected by End of Year.': ‹https://www.formularywatch.com/ view/fda-decision-on-donanemab-for-alzheimer-s-expected-by-endof-year›, cited 10 January, 2024.
- 29) PHARMA  JAPAN,  'Donanemab's  Limited  Duration  of  Dosing Benefits  Patients  on  Safety  Front:  Lilly  CSO.':  ‹https://pj.jiho.jp/ article/249705›, cited 10 January, 2024.
- 30) Siemers  E.  R.,  Sundell  K.  L.,  Carlson  C.,  Case  M.,  Sethuraman G.,  Liu-Seifert  H.,  Dowsett  S.  A.,  Pontecorvo  M.  J.,  Dean  R.  A., Demattos R., Alzheimers Dement. , 12 , 110-120 (2016).
- 31) Jeong  H.,  Shin  H.,  Hong  S.,  Kim  Y., Exp.  Neurobiol. , 31 ,  65-88 (2022).
- 32) Miles  L.,  Crespi  G.,  Doughty  L.,  Parker  M.  W., Sci.  Rep. , 3 ,  1302 (2013).
- 33) Zhao  J.,  Nussinov  R.,  Ma  B., J.  Biol.  Chem. , 292 ,  18325-18343 (2017).
- 34) Sandberg  A.,  Berenjeno-Correa  E.,  Rodriguez  R.  C.,  Axenhus  M., Weiss  S.  S.,  Batenburg  K.,  Hoozemans  J.  J.  M.,  Tjernberg  L.  O., Scheper W., Alzheimers Res. Ther. , 14 , 196 (2022).
- 35) Kouhi  A.,  Pachipulusu  V.,  Kapenstein  T.,  Hu  P.,  Epstein  A.  L., Khawli L. A., Int. J. Mol. Sci. , 22 , 6442 (2021).
- 36) Withington C. G., Turner R. S., Front. Neurol. , 13 , 862369 (2022).
- 37) Denail, 'Engineering Brain Delivery.':  ‹https://www.denalitherapeutics. com/science/engineering›, cited 10 January, 2024.
- 38) Biogen,  'Biogen  Exercises  Option  with  Denali  to  Develop  and Commercialize Antibody Transport Vehicle Program Targeting Amyloid Beta.': ‹https://investors.biogen.com/news-releases/ news-release-details/biogen-exercises-option-denali-develop-andcommercialize›, cited 10 January, 2024.
- 39) Nikkei  Biotechnology  &amp;  Business:  ‹https://bio.nikkeibp.co.jp/atcl/ news/p1/23/03/11/10482/›, cited 10 January, 2024.
- 40) ALZFORUM,  'Unlocking Blood-Brain Barrier Boosts  Immu -notherapy Efficacy, Lowers ARIA.': ‹https://www.alzforum.org/ news/conference-coverage/unlocking-blood-brain-barrier-boostsimmunotherapy-efficacy-lowers-aria›, cited 10 January, 2024.
- 41) Jönsson L., Wimo  A., Handels R., Johansson G., Boada M., Engelborgh  S.,  Frölich  L.,  Jessen  F.,  Kehoe  P.  G.,  Kramberger  M., de Mendonça A., Ousset P. J., Scarmeas N., Visser P. J., Waldemar G., Winblad B., Lancet Reg. Health Eur. , 29 , 100657 (2023).
- 42) ALZFORUM, 'Give BACE Inhibitors a Second Chance?': ‹https://www.alzforum.org/news/conference-coverage/give-baceinhibitors-second-chance›, cited 10 January, 2024.
- 43) ALZFORUM,  'Second-Generation γ -Secretase  Modulator  Heads to  Phase  2.':  ‹https://www.alzforum.org/news/conference-coverage/ second-generation-g-secretase-modulator-heads-phase-2›, cited 10 January, 2024.
- 44) Hampel H., Vassar R., De Strooper B., et  al. , Biol.  Psychiatry , 89 , 745-756 (2021).
- 45) McDade E., Voytyuk I., Aisen P., Bateman R. J., Carrillo M. C., De Strooper B., Haass C., Reiman E. M., Sperling R., Tariot P. N., Yan R., Masters C. L., Vassar R., Lichtenthaler S. F., Nat. Rev. Neurol. , 17 , 703-714 (2021).
- 46) Koriyama Y., Hori A., Ito H., et  al. , J.  Med. Chem. , 64 ,  1873-1888 (2021).
- 47) Pratsch  K.,  Unemura  C.,  Ito  M.,  Lichtenthaler  S.  F.,  Horiguchi  N., Herms J., Int. J. Mol. Sci. , 24 , 12283 (2023).
- 48) Ballatore  C.,  Lee  V.  M.,  Trojanowski  J.  Q., Nat.  Rev.  Neurosci. , 8 , 663-672 (2007).
- 49) Li C., Götz J., Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. , 16 , 863-883 (2017).
- 50) Hill E., Wall M. J., Moffat K. G., Karikari T. K., Front. Mol. Neurosci. , 13 , 155 (2020).
- 51) Ye H., Han Y., Li P., Su Z., Huang Y., J.  Mol. Neurosci. , 72 ,  15571571 (2022).
- 52) Braak H., Braak E., Acta Neuropathol. , 82 , 239-259 (1991).
- 53) Therriault  J.,  Pascoal  T.  A.,  Lussier  F.  Z., et  al. , Nat.  Aging , 2 , 526-535 (2022).
- 54) Tatulian S. A., Drug Discov. Today , 27 , 1027-1043 (2022).
- 55) Shipton  O.  A.,  Leitz  J.  R.,  Dworzak  J.,  Acton  C.  E.,  Tunbridge  E. M., Denk F., Dawson H. N., Vitek M. P., Wade-Martins R., Paulsen O., Vargas-Caballero M., J. Neurosci. , 31 , 1688-1692 (2011).
- 56) Roberson E. D., Scearce-Levie K., Palop J. J., Yan F., Cheng I. H., Wu  T.,  Gerstein  H.,  Yu  G.  Q.,  Mucke  L., Science , 316 ,  750-754 (2007).
- 57) Ossenkoppele R., Pichet Binette A., Groot C., et al. , Nat. Med. , 28 , 2381-2387 (2022).
- 58) Devous  M.  D.,  Sr  Fleisher  A.  S.,  Pontecorvo  M.  J.,  Siderowf  A., Navitsky M., Kennedy I., Southekal S., Harris T. S., Mintun M. A., J. Alzheimers Dis. , 80 , 1091-1104 (2021).

- 59) Jack  C.  R.  Jr.,  Knopman  D.  S.,  Jagust  W.  J.,  Shaw  L.  M.,  Aisen  P. S., Weiner M. W., Petersen R. C., Trojanowski J. Q., Lancet Neurol. , 9 , 119-128 (2010).
- 60) Rankin  C.  A.,  Sun  Q.,  Gamblin  T.  C., Mol.  Neurodegener. , 2 ,  12 (2007).
- 61) Lovestone S., Boada M., Dubois B., Hüll M., Rinne J. O., Huppertz H. J., Calero M., Andrés M. V., Gómez-Carrillo B., León T., del Ser T., J. Alzheimers Dis. , 45 , 75-88 (2015).
- 62) Cummings  J.,  Lee  G.,  Nahed  P.,  Kambar  M.  E.  Z.  N.,  Zhong  K., Fonseca  J.,  Taghva  K., Alzheimers  Dement. (N.  Y.), 8 ,  e12295 (2022), NY.
- 63) Hart  G.  W.,  Slawson  C.,  Ramirez-Correa  G.,  Lagerlof  O., Annu. Rev. Biochem. , 80 , 825-858 (2011).
- 64) Zhu Y.,  Shan  X.,  Yuzwa  S.  A.,  Vocadlo  D.  J., J.  Biol.  Chem. , 289 , 34472-34481 (2014).
- 65) ClinicalTrials.gov,  'A  Study  of  LY3372689  to  Assess  the  Safety, Tolerability,  and  Efficacy  in  Participants  With  Alzheimer's  Dis -ease.': ‹https://clinicaltrials.gov/study/NCT05063539›, cited 10 January, 2024.
- 66) Huang L. K., Chao S. P., Hu C. J., J. Biomed. Sci. , 27 , 18 (2020).
- 67) Davidowitz  E.  J.,  Krishnamurthy  P.  K.,  Lopez  P.,  Jimenez  H., Adrien  L.,  Davies  P.,  Moe  J.  G., J.  Alzheimers  Dis. , 73 ,  147-161 (2020).
- 68) ClinicalTrials.gov, '24 Months Safety and Efficacy Study of AADvac1 in  Patients  With  Mild  Alzheimer's  Disease  (ADAMANT).':  ‹https:// classic.clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02579252›, cited 10 January, 2024.
- 69) ClinicalTrials.gov,  'Phase  1  Study  of  OLX-07010  in  Healthy  Adult and  Elderly  Participants.'  ‹https://classic.clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/ NCT05696483›, cited 10 January, 2024.
- 70) Dominguez-Meijide A., Vasili E., Outeiro T. F., Brain Sci. , 10 ,  858 (2020).
- 71) Florian H., Wang D., Arnold S. E., Boada M., Guo Q., Jin Z., Zheng H.,  Fisseha  N.,  Kalluri  H.  V.,  Rendenbach-Mueller  B.,  Budur  K., Gold M., Brain , 146 , 2275-2284 (2023).
- 72) Teng  E.,  Manser  P.  T.,  Pickthorn  K., et  al. , JAMA  Neurol. , 79 , 758-767 (2022).
- 73) Biogen,  'Biogen  Announces  Topline  Results  From  Phase  2  Study of  Gosuranemab, an Anti-Tau Antibody, for Alzheimer's Disease.': ‹https://investors.biogen.com/news-releases/news-release-details/ biogen-announces-topline-results-phase-2-study-gosuranemab-anti›, cited 10 January, 2024.
- 74) Horie  K.,  Barthélemy  N.  R.,  Sato  C.,  Bateman  R.  J., Brain , 144 , 515-527 (2021).
- 75) Courade  J.  P.,  Angers  R.,  Mairet-Coello  G., et  al. , Acta  Neuropathol. , 136 , 729-745 (2018).
- 76) Vandermeeren M., Borgers M., Van Kolen K., et  al. , J.  Alzheimers Dis. , 65 , 265-281 (2018).
- 77) Eisai, 'EISAI  TO  PRESENT  THE  LATEST  ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE PIPELINE AND RESEARCH, INCLUDING LECANEMAB  AND  ANTI-MTBR  TAU  ANTIBODY  E2814, AT THE ALZHEIMER'S ASSOCIATION  INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE  (AAIC)  2023.'  ‹https://www.eisai.com/news/2023/ news202351.html›, cited 10 January, 2024.
- 78) Eisai,  'FIRST  SUBJECT  ENROLLED  IN  PHASE  II/III  STUDY OF EISAI'S ANTI-MTBR TAU ANTIBODY E2814 FOR DOMINANTLY INHERITED ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE (DIAD),  CONDUCTED  BY  DIAN-TU.':  ‹https://www.eisai.com/ news/2022/pdf/enews202205pdf.pdf›, cited 10 January, 2024.
- 79) ClinicalTrials.gov,  'A  Study  to  Evaluate  the  Safety,  Tolerability and Immunogenicity of Tau Targeted Vaccines in Participants With Early Alzheimer's Disease.': ‹https://classic.clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/ show/NCT04445831›, cited 10 January, 2024.
- 80) Novak  P.,  Kovacech  B.,  Katina  S., et  al. , Nat.  Aging , 1 ,  521-534 (2021).
- 81) ClinicalTrials.gov, 'A Study to Learn About the Safety of BIIB080 and  Whether  it  Can  Improve  Symptoms  of  Participants  With  Mild Cognitive  Impairment  Due  to  Alzheimer's  Disease  (AD)  or  Mild AD Dementia Between 50  to  80  Years  of  Age  (CELIA).':  ‹https:// classic.clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT05399888›,  cited  10  January, 2024.
- 82) ClinicalTrials.gov, 'Study of Safety, Tolerability, Pharmacodynamics  and  Pharmacokinetics  of  NIO752  in  Early  Alzheimer's Disease Participants.' ‹https://classic.clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/ NCT05469360›, cited 10 January, 2024.
- 83) DeVos S. L., Miller R. L., Schoch K. M., Holmes B. B., Kebodeaux C. S., Wegener A. J., Chen G., Shen T., Tran H., Nichols B., Zanardi T.  A.,  Kordasiewicz  H.  B.,  Swayze  E.  E.,  Bennett  C.  F.,  Diamond M. I., Miller T. M., Sci. Transl. Med. , 9 , eaag0481 (2017).
- 84) Biogen,  'New  Data  Presented  at  AD/PD ™ 2023  Show  Biogen's BIIB080 (MAPT ASO) Substantially Reduced Tau Protein Levels in Patients  with  Early-stage  Alzheimer's  Disease.':  ‹https://investors. biogen.com/news-releases/news-release-details/new-data-presentedadpdtm-2023-show-biogens-biib080-mapt-aso›, cited 10 January, 2024.
- 85) Biogen, 'New Data from Biogen's Investigational Antisense Oligo -nucleotide  (ASO)  Targeting  Tau  Shows  Promise  for  Potential  New Generation  of  Treatments  in  Early  Alzheimer's  Disease.':  ‹https:// investors.biogen.com/news-releases/news-release-details/new-databiogens-investigational-antisense-oligonucleotide-aso›,  cited  10  January, 2024.
- 86) Alzheimer's Association, 'Revised Criteria for Diagnosis and Staging  of  Alzheimer's  Disease:  Alzheimer's  Association  Workgroup.': ‹https://aaic.alz.org/nia-aa.asp›, cited 10 January, 2024.
- 87) Rafii  M.  S.,  Sperling  R.  A.,  Donohue  M.  C.,  Zhou  J.,  Roberts  C., Irizarry M. C., Dhadda S., Sethuraman G., Kramer L. D., Swanson C. J.,  Li  D.,  Krause S., Rissman R. A., Walter S., Raman R., Johnson K. A., Aisen P. S., Alzheimers Dement. , 19 , 1227-1233 (2023).
- 88) Eli  Lilly,  'A  Donanemab  (LY3002813)  Prevention  Study  in  Participants  With  Alzheimer's  Disease  (TRAILBLAZER-ALZ  3).': ‹https://trials.lilly.com/en-US/trial/302480›, cited 10 January, 2024.
- 89) Eisai,  'DIAN-TU  SELECTS  LECANEMAB  AS  BACKGROUND ANTI-AMYLOID THERAPY IN CLINICAL TRIAL EVALUATING INVESTIGATIONAL THERAPY TARGETING TAU FOR DOMINANTLY INHERITED ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE.': ‹https://www.eisai.com/news/2021/pdf/enews202184pdf. pdf›, cited 10 January, 2024.