<!-- image -->

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

## Neuropharmacology

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/neuropharm

## NLRP3 inflammasome signalling in Alzheimer ' s disease

<!-- image -->

R ´ oisín M. McManus a,b,* , Eicke Latz b,c,d,e

- a German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Venusberg Campus 1/99, 53127, Bonn, Germany
- b Institute of Innate Immunity, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany
- c Centre of Molecular Inflammation Research, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, 7491, Trondheim, Norway
- d Division of Infectious Diseases and Immunology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA, 01605, USA
- e Deutsches Rheuma-Forschungszentrum (DRFZ), Charit ´ eplatz 1, 10117, Berlin, Germany

## A R T I C L E  I N F O

Handling Editor: Bruno Frenguelli

Keywords: NLRP3 inflammasome Microglia Alzheimer ' s disease Neuroimmunology Immune-targeted therapies

Preclinical models

## 1. Introduction

Humans have developed a sophisticated immune system that is able to rapidly detect and respond to pathogenic organisms or tissue damage. This  system  has  two  branches,  the  innate  and  the  adaptive  immune system. The adaptive immune system consists of B and T cells, which express a huge variety of highly specific receptors that detect a unique antigen. This system is initially slower to respond than the innate immune system. During an infection for example, it can take a number of days  for  the  adaptive  immune  response  to  take  effect  (Kumar  et  al., 2018). However, an immunological memory is created after the first response to the pathogen, thus on re-challenge the response is more rapid.

The innate immune system consists of cells such as macrophages, neutrophils and  microglia  that  contain  germline-encoded  pattern recognition  receptors  (PRRs).  PRRs  detect  set  sequences  denoting pathogenor danger-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs and DAMPs), which contain either foreign or host-derived activating motifs respectively (Janeway and Medzhitov, 2002). The recognition of these molecular sequences is key for the innate immune system to mount a sufficient response. On activation, a PRR induces a signalling cascade within minutes, triggering pathway-specific transcription factors that facilitate  the  transcription  of  key  inflammatory  genes,  which  are

## A B S T R A C T

Every year, 10 million people develop dementia, the most common of which is Alzheimer ' s disease (AD). To date, there  is  no  way  to  prevent  cognitive  decline  and  therapies  are  limited.  This  review  provides  a  neuroimmunological perspective on the progression of AD, and discusses the immune-targeted therapies that are in preclinical and clinical trials that may impact the development of this disease. Specifically, we look to the role of the NLRP3 inflammasome, its triggers in the brain and how its activation can contribute to the progression of dementia.  We  summarise  the  range  of  inhibitors  targeting  the  NLRP3  inflammasome  and  its  downstream pathways that are under investigation, and discuss future therapeutic perspectives for this devastating condition. This article is part of the Special Issue on "Microglia".

translated and released e.g. Tumor necrosis factor α (TNF α )  or  Interferonγ (IFNγ ). There are many different PRRs, including the Toll like receptor (TLR), NOD-like receptor (NLR) and RIG-like receptor (RLR) families, which differ in their cellular location, structure and the motif they recognise, meaning the cell is well equipped to detect any challenge or stress signal (Takeda et al., 2003; Heneka et al., 2018).

This first inflammatory response is central for the initial control of the trauma or challenge, such as invading pathogens (e.g. bacteria or viruses).  The  innate  immune  cells  also  coordinate  with  cells  of  the adaptive immune system and at later stages of the immune response, they secrete protective factors such as interleukin (IL)-10 to participate in  wound  healing  and  resolve  the  tissue  damage.  These  immune  responses are normally  beneficial.  Without  a  functioning  immune response,  humans  are  vulnerable  to  recurrent,  severe  infections  and even death.

However, there are instances where the immune system can become maladaptive, and innate immune triggers induce an over-activated or non-resolving, chronic response. This heightened immune response is observed  across  many  diseases  such  as  atherosclerosis,  gout  and  in neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer ' s  disease  (AD).  In  this review, we will discuss the role of the innate immune system in the development and progression of AD. In particular, we will focus on the role of the NOD-, LRR-, and pyrin domain-containing protein 3 (NLRP3) inflammasome, summarising the latest findings on NLRP3

* Corresponding author. German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Venusberg Campus 1/99, 53127, Bonn, Germany. E-mail address: roisin.mcmanus@dzne.de (R.M. McManus).

Received 31 January 2024; Received in revised form 20 March 2024; Accepted 29 March 2024

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

R.M. McManus and E. Latz

| Abbreviations   | Abbreviations                                                                   | GWAS IFN- γ   | Genome-wide association studies Interferon-gamma      |
|-----------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------|-------------------------------------------------------|
| A β             | Amyloid beta                                                                    | IL            | Interleukin                                           |
| ASC             | Apoptosis-associated speck-like protein containing a caspase recruitment domain | LOAD LRR      | Late onset AD Leucine-rich repeats                    |
| AD              | Alzheimer ' s disease                                                           | MCI           | Mild cognitive impairment                             |
| ADP             | Adenosine diphosphate                                                           | NBD           | Nucleotide binding domain                             |
| ALS             | Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis                                                   | NF κ B        | Nuclear factor kappa B                                |
| APP             | Amyloid precursor protein                                                       | NFT           | Neurofibrillary tangle                                |
| ARIA            | Amyloid-related imaging abnormalities                                           | NMDA          | N-methyl- d -aspartate                                |
| APOE            | Apolipoprotein E                                                                | NLR           | NOD-like receptor                                     |
| ATP             | Adenosine triphosphate                                                          | NLRP          | NOD-, LRR-,and pyrin domain-containing protein        |
| BBB             | Blood-brain barrier                                                             | NOD           | Nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain             |
| CAPS            | Cryopyrin-associated periodic syndromes                                         | PAMP          | Pathogen-associated molecular pattern                 |
| CARD            | Caspase recruitment domain                                                      | PET           | Positron emission tomography                          |
| CNS             | Central nervous system                                                          | PRR           | Pattern recognition receptor                          |
| CR1             | Complement receptor 1                                                           | PTM           | Post-translational modification                       |
| CSF             | Cerebrospinal fluid                                                             | PYD           | Pyrin domain                                          |
| DAMP            | Danger associated molecular pattern                                             | RLR           | Retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I)-like receptors |
| EOAD            | Early onset AD                                                                  | siRNA         | Small interfering RNA                                 |
| EMA             | European Medicines Agency                                                       | TNF α         | Tumor necrosis factor alpha                           |
| FDA             | United States Food and Drug Administration                                      | TLR           | Toll like receptor                                    |
| FTD             | Frontotemporal dementia                                                         | TREM2         | Triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2      |
| GSDMD           | Gasdermin D                                                                     |               |                                                       |

inflammasome activation in the brain and the therapeutic potential of targeting this innate immune sensor.

## 2. Alzheimer ' s disease

In 2019, there were 55.2 million people with dementia worldwide, the most common of which is AD (WHO Global status report, 2021, https://www.who.int/health-topics/dementia#tab = tab\_1). AD is broadly divided into two categories, early onset AD (EOAD) or late onset AD (LOAD). EOAD affects &lt; 1 -5% of all cases, it is typically familial and occurs before the age of 65 (Tanzi, 2012). In contrast, LOAD is much more prevalent and the greatest risk factor is age. Currently over 33% of people aged 85 and over have AD (Rajan et al., 2021), and considering our aging population it is estimated that there will be over 78 million people  with  dementia  and  AD  in  2030  (WHO  Global  status  report, 2021). As the pathology and progression of disease is similar between EOAD and LOAD (Spina et al., 2021), the genetic  factors  that  drive EOAD  have  been  instrumental  in  understanding  and  modelling  this condition.

## 2.1. A β and Tau

AD is characterised by a build-up of the protein amyloidβ (A β ) and tau in plaques and neurofibrillary tangles (NFT) respectively. These are dense and insoluble deposits, causing physical  disruption to the  surrounding cells. Neuronal loss, especially cholinergic neurons, is also a

Fig. 1. Sequence of events that lead to the development of Alzheimer ' s disease. 1. The progression of AD has a long pre-clinical phase. A β is the first protein to become deposited in the brain, which forms oligomers, protofibrils and ultimately dense insoluble plaques. 2. The A β is followed by tau hyperphosphorylation, which then loses its capacity to stabilise microtubules, and forms intracellular neurofibrillary tangles. These neurons eventually die leaving extracellular tangles, often known as ghost tangles, behind. 3. The build-up of A β and tau activates microglia and astrocytes, triggering cytokine release and neuroinflammation. 4. Over time, these factors come together to cause neuronal death, inducing structural brain changes particularly at sites such as the hippocampus and frontal cortex. The progression to dementia and severe AD is more rapid.

<!-- image -->

GLYPH&lt;0&gt;≥

R.M. McManus and E. Latz common feature and is associated with the increasing cognitive decline (Fig. 1) (Mufson et al., 2008).

A β is formed from amyloid precursor protein (APP) by the sequential cleavage of β - and γ -secretase. To date, 102 mutations have been found in APP, with over 38 of them pathogenic (https://www.alzforum.org/ mutations). Such mutations typically favour cleavage of APP towards the amyloidogenic as opposed to non-amyloidogenic pathway (Tcw and Goate,  2017).  Strikingly,  346  mutations  have  been  documented  in PSEN1, which encodes for the protein presenilin-1 and forms the active cleavage site of γ -secretase. Of these mutations, 213 were classified as pathogenic or likely pathogenic (https://www.alzforum.org/mutations ).  Murine  animal  models  of  AD  are  often  based  on  these  mutations, such as the APPswe/PSEN1dE9 or the 5xFAD mice that mimic many features of AD, and are two of the more commonly used lines (Forner et al., 2021; McManus et al., 2014).

The progression of AD is initially quite slow, with a long pre-clinical phase. A β is the first protein to become deposited in the brain, which can begin  approx.  two  decades  before  the  emergence  of  cognitive  issues (Villemagne et al., 2013). The  A β is followed by tau hyperphosphorylation changes, inflammation, brain atrophy, then memory impairment  and  finally  cognitive  decline  (Fig.  1)  (Jack  et  al.,  2010; Rajmohan and Reddy, 2017). Once the structural brain changes occur, the progression to dementia and severe AD is more rapid. Hippocampal atrophy and the following memory impairment occur on average 4 and 3 years  respectively  before  the  onset  of  dementia  (Villemagne  et  al., 2013). The cognitive changes observed are divided into mild cognitive impairment (MCI), moderate and then severe AD, and range from general problems with thinking and memory to severe memory loss, personality changes and behavioural issues. Of those with MCI, 10 -20% will develop AD within a year (Koepsell and Monsell, 2012; Petersen, 2016), and 68 -80% will convert within 6 years (Mauri et al., 2012; Wilson et al., 2011; Lopez, 2013).

Tau  is  a  neuronal  microtubule-associated  protein,  that  becomes hyperphosphorylated in AD and loses its capacity to stabilise microtubules. This results in impaired neuronal transport and further sensitises neurons  to  A β -induced  toxicity  (Rajmohan  and  Reddy,  2017;  Ittner et al., 2011). These changes occur downstream of amyloid plaque formation,  and  A β has  been  shown  to  activate  a  number  of  kinases including  CDK-5  and  GSK-3 β that  drive  tau  hyperphosphorylation (Rajmohan and Reddy, 2017).

It is important to note that while A β is a classic feature of AD, there are  older  individuals  who  have  significant  levels  of  A β deposition throughout the brain but are cognitively intact (Mormino and Papp, 2018; Zolochevska and Taglialatela, 2016). It is not fully understood why that is the case. One possibility that might distinguish these people is  in  how the resident brain cells are responding to the A β stimulus, which may be different. Another idea is that the individuals will develop memory decline at later timepoints. Indeed, not all those who receive a diagnosis of MCI go on to develop AD (Koepsell and Monsell, 2012). Uncovering the mechanisms that promote resilience in these individuals is a topic of interest and will certainly help with the development of therapies to protect the brain against cognitive decline.

## 3. AD treatments

The first therapy to receive FDA approval for AD was a cholinesterase inhibitor, donepezil, in 1996. That was followed by rivastigmine in 1997 and galantamine in 2001 (which are also cholinesterase inhibitors), and the  N-methyld -aspartate  (NMDA)  receptor  antagonist  memantine  in 2003. These drugs act by either increasing the availability of acetylcholine  to  preserve  cholinergic  neuronal  signalling  or  by  blocking NMDA and thus reducing the glutamatergic neuronal hyperexcitability observed in AD. To date they are the only small molecule pharmaceutical therapies available for AD. Importantly, they are capable of managing the symptoms for a few months as opposed to slowing or even stopping disease pathology.

Due to the central role of amyloid in the development and progression  of  AD,  as  a  novel  therapeutic  strategy  many  researchers  have focused their efforts on targeting this protein directly. This resulted in the first FDA approved therapy in 15 years, Aducanumab (Aduhelm ™ ) in 2021. Aducanumab is an A β -targeted monoclonal antibody that can bind A β aggregates,  including soluble oligomers and insoluble fibrils (Budd Haeberlein et al., 2022). Lecanemab (Leqembi ™ ) is a humanised monoclonal antibody that targets A β oligomers, protofibrils and insoluble fibrils (Swanson et al., 2021) and just received FDA approval in 2023.  Finally,  Donanemab  is  another  humanised  antibody  that  was submitted  to  the  FDA  for  approval  in  2023,  but  it  recognises  A β in established plaques, specifically by targeting an N-terminal pyroglutamate A β epitope (Sims et al., 2023; Mintun et al., 2021). Binding of these antibodies to A β interrupts the amyloid-aggregation process, while also targeting the A β for removal by microglia-mediated phagocytosis (Linse et al., 2020; Sevigny et al., 2016). While donepezil, galantamine, rivastigmine  and  memantine  all  received  approval  from  the  European Medicines Agency (EMA) shortly after FDA approval, that is not the case for any of the A β -targeted immunotherapies. To date, Aducanumab is only available to people in the USA and Lecanumab is available in the USA  and  Japan.  There  has  been  some  controversy  regarding  the approval of these compounds, particularly Aducanumab. This is because the ENGAGE and EMERGE phase 3 clinical trials to test Aducanumab were terminated early in 2019 when an interim analysis predicted the studies  would  not  meet  their  primary  endpoints.  A  later  re-analysis showed  that  those  on  the  highest  dose  of  Aducanumab  had  slowed cognitive  decline  in  the  EMERGE,  but  not  the  ENGAGE,  trial  (Budd Haeberlein  et  al.,  2022).  Based  on  these  findings,  the  FDA  granted accelerated approval for the use of Aducanumab in 2021, although this was met with mixed reactions from the AD community. In January 2024, it  was  announced  that  Aducanumab  would  be  withdrawn  from  the market and production discontinued, likely due to the controversies and mixed results.

Targeting A β directly has revolutionised the treatments available for AD, and revitalised the amyloid hypothesis, which after decades of failed clinical trials was starting to be questioned. Indeed, these therapies also provide  new  treatment  perspectives  for  those  with  Down  Syndrome, who also develop A β -containing plaques as they age (Annus et al., 2016). However, there are important considerations before undertaking these therapies. While all three A β -targeted compounds can quickly remove A β in  the  brain,  cognitive  decline  is  slowed,  rather  than  stopped completely (Budd Haeberlein et al., 2022; Sims et al., 2023; van Dyck et al., 2023). There is also the risk of amyloid-related imaging abnormalities  (ARIA),  which  can  be  a  brain  edema  or  microhaemorrhage (ARIA-E or ARIA-H respectively) (Salloway et al., 2022). Indeed those with certain genetic predisposition such as apolipoprotein E4 (APOE) carriers appear more vulnerable to such effects (Salloway et al., 2022). As A β -targeted immunotherapies are not suitable for everyone, alternative treatments are still needed  to prevent cognitive decline. Immune-modulating therapies  (discussed  below)  may  provide  a  new solution for how we treat MCI and AD.

## 4. The role of microglia in AD

Microglia  are  yolk-sac  derived  myeloid  cells  that  carry  out  many critical  functions  in  the  brain  from  maintaining  homeostasis,  modulating  neuronal  activity  and  importantly,  mediating  the  immune response  of  the  central  nervous  system  (CNS).  These  cells  are  the guardians  of  the  brain.  Microglia  are  highly  phagocytic  and  by expressing an array of PRRs to detect PAMPs or DAMPs, along with constantly  surveying  their  microenvironment,  they  are  poised  to respond to any threat or injury they encounter. However, unlike other tissues and organs, the brain is very sensitive to inflammation. Therefore, the microglial inflammatory response must be carefully regulated to limit the damage to neighbouring neurons and later support remodelling or repair. There are also number of receptor-ligand interactions

R.M. McManus and E. Latz between microglia and astrocytes or neurons to maintain the microglia in a regulated state (Manich et al., 2019; Finneran and Nash, 2019). This is a very delicate balance, and the microglial response easily becomes disordered in diseases of the brain.

When Alois Alzheimer first described Alzheimer ' s disease in 1907, he already  noted  the  presence  of  abnormal  glial  cells  neighbouring  the amyloid plaques (Alzheimer et al., 1995). We now know that microglia have a key role in the progression and development of AD. Genome-wide association  studies  (GWAS)  have  identified  many  microglial-specific genes that increase the risk for developing AD, such as Triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2 (TREM2), CD33 and complement receptor 1 (CR1) (Naj et al., 2011; Bellenguez et al., 2022), many of which affect microglial phagocytosis (Butler et al., 2021; Ulrich et al., 2014). In 2008, Halle and colleagues first showed that when microglia phagocytose A β it triggers activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome (Halle et  al.,  2008),  thus  firmly  establishing the  role of innate immune signalling in this neurodegenerative disease.

## 5. NLRP3 inflammasome activation -what we know so far

The first inflammasome complex to be discovered was the NLRP1 inflammasome by the group of Jürg Tschopp in 2002 (Martinon et al.,

2002).  Inflammasomes  are  multi-protein  complexes  that  contain  a sensor protein (in this case NLRP1), the adaptor protein Apoptosis-associated  speck-like  protein  containing  a  caspase  recruitment domain (ASC) and the proteolytic enzyme caspase-1. This novel finding  was  quickly  followed  by  the  identification  of  the  NLRP3 inflammasome and unravelling of the complex signalling pathways that regulate  the  assembly  of  this  multi  protein  complex  (Agostini  et  al., 2004;  Martinon  et  al.,  2006;  Mariathasan  et  al.,  2006).  There  are  a number  of  PRRs  that  can  form  inflammasome  complexes,  including NLRP1, NLRP3, NLRC4 and AIM2 (Zheng et al., 2020). While the triggers of these PRRs are unique to each sensor protein, once activated, the complexes  converge  on  similar  signalling  pathways,  ultimately  producing  active  IL-1 β ,  as  discussed  in  more  detail  below.  The  NLRP3 inflammasome is the best studied inflammasome complex, and to date, has the most well-defined role in AD. Therefore, NLRP3 will be the focus of this review.

Due to its inflammatory nature, activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome is a tightly regulated process with a number of steps, that need to occur in a specific order (Fig. 2). The first is a priming step, where a cytokine receptor or TLR signalling induces NFκ B activation and nuclear translocation resulting in the transcription and later translation of NLRP3  and  pro-IL-1 β (Bauernfeind  et  al.,  2009).  Post-translational

Fig. 2. NLRP3 inflammasome signalling pathway, activators and inhibitors. NLRP3 requires two signals for activation, a priming and licensing step (transcriptional regulation) and an activating step (post-transcriptonal regulation). TLR or cytokine receptor signalling can prime NLRP3 by increasing the mRNA levels of Nlrp3 and Il1 β . Once translated, NLRP3 is in an autoinhibited form, and a second signal is required to release this and allow full assembly of the NLRP3 inflammasome complex. A number of post-translational modifications occur on NLRP3, such as phosphorylation, that facilitate this conformational change. NLRP3 also transitions from an oligomeric, cage like structure, into a disc-like shape, exposing its PYD domain and allowing ASC to bind. A β and tau can act as this second signal. Once assembled, ASC nucleates into a speck formation, providing a platform for the recruitment and auto-catalysis of caspase-1. Cleaved-caspase-1 in turn cleaves GSDMD, allowing GSDMD-N to oligomerize and form a pore in the plasma membrane. Pro-IL-1 β is cleaved to its active form, which can leave through the GSDMD pores, and also through GSDMD-independent means. ASC-specks are also released, which can be taken up by neighbouring cells, or act as a seed for A β ,  perpetuating the inflammatory cycle. Current therapies are highlighted in red, namely NLRP3-targeted ASOs, to induced mRNA degradation. CRID3, Oridonin or DFV890, are specific NLRP3  inflammasome  inhibitors.  VX-765,  a  caspase-1  inhibitor.  Nanobodies,  to  disrupt  ASC  specks.  Anakinra,  Canakinumab  or  Rilonacept  to  prevent  IL1 β signalling.

<!-- image -->

R.M. McManus and E. Latz modifications (PTMs) also occur during the first step, such as dephosphorylation, that contribute to the licensing of NLRP3 for downstream signalling  (Akbal  et  al.,  2022).  NLRP3  is  initially  produced  in  an auto-inhibited and closed form, and a second signal is required to release this auto-inhibition allowing assembly of NLRP3 into an inflammasome complex.

Once  the  cell  detects  this  second  signal,  other  PTMs,  including phosphorylation and ubiquitination occur on NLRP3 (see (Akbal et al., 2022) for a thorough review) that facilitate the transition of NLRP3 from an inactive oligomer to an active multimeric inflammasome. The NLRP3 protein contains a LRR, a NACHT domain containing ATP binding and hydrolysis activity, and a pyrin (PYD) domain, with PTMs identified on all three regions (Akbal et al., 2022). The NACHT domain is critical in the  activation  of  NLRP3,  where  ATP  binds  the  NACHT  nucleotide binding domain (NBD) in the active state (Fu and Wu, 2023). In the inactive state, ADP is bound (Fu and Wu, 2023). It is important to note that  unlike  most  cell  types,  human  monocytes  do  not  require  two separate signalling steps to activate NLRP3, where engagement of TLR4 alone or presence of nigericin can drive NLRP3 inflammasome activation (Akbal et al., 2022; Gaidt et al., 2016; Gritsenko et al., 2020).

Recent studies have uncovered the exact structures formed by NLRP3 and its inflammasome complex that both influence and contribute to its activation. In the inactive state, NLRP3 oligomers are closed and can form a cage-like structure, where the PYD domain is hidden (Andreeva et al., 2021; Hochheiser et al., 2022a). The oligomers are formed though LRR-interactions between two NLRP3 proteins, and then back-to-back interactions with other NLRP3-LRR regions, ultimately forming a complex of 10 (human) or 12 -16 (mouse) NLRP3 proteins in a double ring structure (Andreeva et al., 2021; Hochheiser et al., 2022a). Once activated,  the  NLRP3  complex  undergoes  a  conformational  change  and opens up to a disc-like shape (Xiao et al., 2023). The PYD domain of NLRP3 becomes accessible, allowing the PYD domain of ASC to bind. ASC then oligomerizes in a prion-like manner (Hochheiser et al., 2022b), forming a speck and growing to approx. 1 μ m in size (Fernandes-Alnemri et  al.,  2007).  Along  with  its  PYD  domain,  ASC  also  has  a  caspase recruitment domain (CARD), that binds pro-caspase-1. Facilitated by the molecular  ASC  platform,  pro-caspase-1  dimerizes  and  undergoes  an auto-catalytic reaction that produces active caspase-1 (Fig. 2). This is a crucial  step  in  the  pathway,  the  active  caspase-1  can  now  cleave pro-IL-1 β and pro-IL-18 to their active forms. Gasdermin D (GSDMD) is also cleaved by caspase-1, releasing its N-terminal fragment (He et al., 2015). This step allows GSDMD to oligomerize and form a pore in the plasma membrane, leading to the extracellular release of active IL-1 β , IL-18, ASC specks and often, pyroptotic cell death. In the absence of GSDMD, GSDME can become cleaved and form a pore in the membrane, although this does not occur as quickly as GSDMD (Zhou and Abbott, 2021). Indeed, not all NLRP3-inflammasome triggers induce GSDMD-mediated pyroptosis (Rashidi et al., 2019). Some do not induce pyroptosis at all, even though they sufficiently induce NLRP3-dependent release of active IL-1 β (Wolf et al., 2016). IL-1 β can also be released without  pyroptosis  occurring  (Monteleone  et  al.,  2018).  Cleaving pro-IL-1 β to its active form changes the charge of this protein, allowing association with the negatively charged plasma membrane ruffles and therefore unconventional release (Monteleone et al., 2018).

Unlike other forms of cell death, such as apoptosis which is quite immunologically silent, pyroptosis is a highly inflammatory process and quickly alerts neighbouring cells (Man et al., 2017). These nearby cells sense the released IL-1 β ,  IL-18 and ASC, but also the contents of the original dying cell that act as DAMPs, triggering a secondary response (Bertheloot et al., 2021). IL-1 β release is highly inflammatory, and activates IL-1R1 and via the production of chemokines, causes neutrophil recruitment (Sadik et al., 2011; Miller et al., 2006). ASC specks are also released, and can be taken up providing neighbouring cells with the molecular platform to facilitate caspase-1 cleavage, without inflammasome activation (Franklin et al., 2014). As a large protein complex, ASC can also act as a seed for proteins to attach to thus contributing to its inflammatory activity (Venegas et al., 2017; Friker et al., 2020).

While it is well established that NLRP3 requires PTMs and structural conformation changes to become active, it also undergoes changes in its cellular location, such as from the cytosol to the trans -Golgi network or mitochondria (Andreeva et al., 2021; Wolf et al., 2016; Baik et al., 2023; Misawa et al., 2013). There are also species differences in the NLRP3 binding partners (e.g. NEK7) that can influence its activity (Y et al., 2016). How these factors come together and regulate NLRP3 activation in a time and location-dependent manner remain to be fully elucidated.

What makes NLRP3 a very interesting sensor and later inflammasome complex, is that many different kinds of signals trigger assembly of this  protein,  ranging  from  changes  in  potassium  concentration  (Mu ˜ n et al., 2013), crystals such as cholesterol (Duewell et al., 2010) or uric acid  crystals  (Martinon  et  al.,  2006),  and  protein  aggregates  like  A β (Halle et al., 2008; Sheedy et al., 2013; Heneka et al., 2013) that induce mitochondrial  stress  or  lysosomal  dysfunction.  Due  to  this,  NLRP3 inflammasome  activation  has  been  found  across  many  different  and seemingly unconnected diseases, from atherosclerosis (Duewell et al., 2010), gout (Goldberg et al., 2017), multiple sclerosis (Coll et al., 2015) and AD (Heneka et al., 2013). Together this demonstrates that NLRP3 is an overall sensor of cell stress and a key pharmaceutical target of interest in treating these different conditions.

## 6. NLRP3 inflammasome activation in AD

A number of inflammasome complexes have been examined in the development of AD, including NLRP1 and AIM2 (reviewed here (Heneka et  al.,  2018)).  However,  in  the  brain,  NLRP3  is  the  most  studied inflammasome complex to date. Microglial NLRP3 inflammasome activation  occurs  in  a  very  similar  fashion  as  that  described  for  macrophages. A β and tau are first phagocytosed by TLR2, TLR4 and other scavenger receptors (Sheedy et al., 2013; Ries and Sastre, 2016; Meng et  al.,  2022;  McManus,  2022).  A β can  trigger  NLRP3  inflammasome activation via lysosomal disruption and the release of cathepsin D (Halle et  al.,  2008).  Both  oligomeric  and  fibrillar  A β can  activate  NLRP3, inducing the production of cleaved-caspase-1 and active IL-1 β (Fig. 2), although the intensity of this production is less than that observed for nigericin for example (Lu ˇ ci ¯ unait ˙ e et al., 2020). Indeed, the signals used to prime and activate NLRP3 can induce different degrees of inflammasome  activation  and  the  production  of  downstream  components, where  microbial  factors  (e.g.  nigericin)  are  much  more  potent  and pyroptotic  than  sterile  inflammatory  triggers  (e.g.  ATP  or  A β )  (Bezbradica et al., 2017). NLRP3 inflammasome activation has been found in both the brain and periphery of patients with AD pathology (Heneka et al., 2013; Saresella et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2020). Specifically, the monocytes  of  AD  patients  have  greater  production  of  caspase-1  and IL-1 β to  NLRP3-activating  stimuli  (Saresella  et  al.,  2016).  Increased protein levels of cleaved caspase-1, active IL-1 β ,  cleaved GSDMD and ASC have been found in the post mortem brain tissue of AD patients, in comparison with non-demented, age matched controls (Venegas et al., 2017; Heneka et al., 2013; Zhang et al., 2020; McManus et al., 2022; Ising et al., 2019). AD patients also have increased IL-1 β and GSDMD in their cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) than healthy controls (Shen et al., 2021). A common product of NLRP3 inflammasome activation is the production of IL-18, although to date, this has not been studied much in relation to AD. It has been observed that IL-18 is increased in the post mortem brain tissue of those with AD (Ojala et al., 2009), and it can enhance neuronal production of A β in vitro (Sutinen et al., 2012).

In striking similarity to that observed in humans, activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome has been found by a number of research groups in various animal models of AD, including the APP/PS1 and 5xFAD models (Heneka et al., 2013; Zhang et al., 2020; McManus et al., 2022). Using the APP/PS1 mouse model, deletion of NLRP3 protected the mice from neuroinflammation, A β plaque deposition and the resulting cognitive impairment (Heneka et al., 2013).  Although  it  is  not  known  exactly when  NLRP3  inflammasome  activation  occurs  in  patients,  using  the

R.M. McManus and E. Latz

APP/PS1  animal  model,  we  have  found  that  NLRP3  inflammasome activation  directly  parallels  the  initial  A β deposition  at  6  months (McManus et al., 2022), confirming how closely linked these phenomena are with each other. It is important to note a recent study where NLRP3 or caspase-1 deletion did not affect A β load in their APP/PS1 mouse model (Srinivasan et al., 2024). However, the authors did not assess the levels of any inflammasome components in the brains of these mice  (e.g.  cleaved  caspase-1,  IL-1 β ,  GSDMD,  ASC),  nor  learning  or memory paradigms, therefore it is challenging to interpret the discrepancy in amyloid deposition across these studies.

A β also triggers microglial release of ASC specks, which act as a seed that  A β can  bind  to,  further  enhancing  amyloid  pathology  (Venegas et al., 2017). These ASC-A β composites are highly inflammatory, and cause greater IL-1 β production than either ASC or A β alone in primed microglial cells (Friker et al., 2020).

Tau, which is found in AD and in frontotemporal dementia (FTD), also triggers activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome in patients (Ising et al., 2019) and in animal models of disease such as the Tau22 and Tau301S  mouse  models  (Ising  et  al.,  2019;  Stancu  et  al.,  2019).  In striking similarity to that observed for A β , absence of NLRP3 or ASC in the  Tau22  or  301S  model  of  FTD  rescues  tauopathy,  reduces  neuroinflammation and improves cognitive performance (Ising et al., 2019; Stancu et al., 2019).

It has recently been demonstrated that myelin damage also occurs in AD, and in models of 5xFAD demyelination enhanced A β deposition (Depp et al., 2023). Similarly, western diet impairs lesion recovery in murine models, which was associated with cholesterol crystal-loaded microglial  cells  (Bosch-Queralt  et  al.,  2021).  Lipids  can  activate NLRP3  (Liang  et  al.,  2021),  as  observed  with  western  diet-induced cholesterol  crystals  that  contribute  to  heart  disease  (Duewell  et  al., 2010). It is interesting to speculate whether impaired lipid signalling might also be inducing NLRP3 inflammasome activation in those with AD.

## 7. Therapeutic targeting of the NLRP3 inflammasome pathway

## 7.1. IL-1 β

The  first  therapies  to  target  the  NLRP3  inflammasome  pathway focused  on  IL-1 β (Fig.  2).  Three  compounds  have  had  great  success: Anakinra  (a  recombinant  IL-1  receptor  antagonist)  canakinumab  (a human IgG monoclonal antibody that targets IL-1 β ) and rilonacept (a soluble decoy receptor containing domains of IL-1R1 and IL-1RAcP that also  binds  IL-1 β )  (Dubois et al.,  2011).  Anakinra and rilonacept also block IL-1 α .  These three compounds are FDA-approved to treat those with Cryopyrin-associated periodic syndromes (CAPS) who have a mutation in NLRP3, and to date are the only approved therapies for this condition (Booshehri and Hoffman, 2019). They have been used effectively in other diseases that have NLRP3 involvement, such as arthritis, gout or pericarditis (Mertens and Singh, 2009; Broderick and Hoffman, 2022).

In animal models, anakinra could reduce A β and Tau deposition, and lowered IL-1 β together attenuating cognitive deficits in the 3xTg AD model  (Kitazawa  et  al.,  2011).  Anakinra  or  IL-1r GLYPH&lt;0&gt; / GLYPH&lt;0&gt; also  attenuated A β -induced mitochondrial and memory impairments in vitro and in vivo (Batista et al., 2021). In AD, there is currently an active, phase 2 clinical trial  with  canakinumab  for  those  with  MCI  or  AD  (NCT04795466). These individuals receive canakinumab for 20 weeks, with later follow up visits where cognition and behaviour, and microglial activation by positron emission tomography (PET) will be assessed at various timepoints throughout the study. The estimated completion is spring 2024, therefore  it  will  be  very  interesting  to  see  the  effectiveness  of  this therapy. Only a few studies have specifically targeted IL-1 β in animal models or clinical trials of AD. This is perhaps due to issues crossing the Blood-brain barrier (BBB), where anakinra can pass more easily than canakinumab for example (Sj ¨ ostr ¨ o et al., 2021). Although as the BBB is more open in AD (Ryu and McLarnon, 2009), this should facilitate some treatments accessing the brain. However, IL-1 β is only one downstream mediator, targeting NLRP3 directly or partners in the inflammasome complex would likely have a greater impact.

## 7.2. Caspase-1

Caspase-1  inhibition  has  also  been  examined  in  models  of  AD. Caspase-1 deficiency protected APP/PS1 (Heneka et al., 2013) and J20 mice (Flores et al., 2018) from developing amyloid pathology, neuroinflammation and cognitive deficits.

VX-765 is a well-characterised small molecule inhibitor of caspase-1 (also acting on caspase-4). It is a pro-drug, that upon uptake is acted upon by plasma esterases, converting VX-765 into an active peptidomimetic  metabolite,  VRT-043198,  that  bonds  with  the  active  site  of caspase-1 thus blocking its activity. In the J20 mouse model of AD, VX765  rescued  spatial  memory  impairment,  reduced  microgliosis  and significantly attenuated A β deposition in the 5 -8-month-old mice (Flores et al., 2018). It is important to note that the memory deficits returned when the VX-765 treatment was stopped, indicating the need to regularly inhibit this pathway to maintain protective effects. In older (12 -15 month) J20 mice, VX-765 was still able to rescue memory impairments by boosting performance in the novel objection recognition and Barnes maze tests (Flores et al., 2022). Interestingly VX-765 was no longer able to  reduce  microglial  activity  in  the  older  J20  animals  (assessed  by Iba1-staining), nor did it reduce neuroinflammation or A β deposition, suggesting  a  divergence  in  pathways  contributing  to  the  age-related memory loss in this model (Flores et al., 2022).

## 7.3. NLRP3

Due to its involvement across so many different diseases, pharmacological  inhibition  of  the  NLRP3  inflammasome  is  of  key  interest. CRID3 (or CP-456773, MCC950) is a specific, commercially available inhibitor  of  NLRP3.  Interestingly,  it  was  known  for  many  years  that CRID3  could  block  IL-1 β ,  but  it  was  only  in  2015  that  CRID3  was identified  as  a  specific  NLRP3  inflammasome  inhibitor  (Coll  et  al., 2015). We now understand that CRID3 acts within the NACHT domain of NLRP3 to prevent its activity (Coll et al., 2019). Using cryo-electron microscopy,  Hochheiser  and  colleagues  recently  demonstrated  that CRID3  binds  into  a  specific  cleft  within  NLRP3,  that  connects  four NACHT subdomains with an LRR transition segment. Having unravelled the precise site of action of CRID3, this will undoubtedly facilitate the design of better, more potent inhibitors moving forward (Hochheiser et al., 2022a). While CRID3 has been used in clinical trials, it has high plasma protein binding (Primiano et al., 2016) and it unfortunately can induce liver toxicity in humans at higher concentrations (Torres et al., 2021; Mangan et al., 2018; Cross, 2020). This makes the compound ideal for mechanistic studies in vitro and in vivo ,  but obviously less so as a therapy for patients.

In terms of AD, CRID3 effectively blocked the A β (Lu ˇ ci ¯ unait ˙ e et al., 2020; McManus et al., 2022; Dempsey et al., 2017) or Tau (Ising et al., 2019; Stancu et al., 2019)-induced activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome in vitro , preventing cleavage and release of caspase-1 and IL-1 β . In animal models, CRID3 could prevent the production of IL-1 β , reduced A β deposition and rescued memory impairments in the APP/PS1 model of AD (Dempsey et al., 2017). CRID3 also reduced Tau seeding in the P301S model  of  Tauopathy,  and  attenuated  the  Tau-induced  microgliosis (Stancu et al., 2019).

There  are  a  number  of  other  NLRP3  inflammasome  inhibitors  at various  stages  of  pre-clinical  (IFM-514  (Torres  et  al.,  2021),  CY-09 (Wang  et  al.,  2021))  or  clinical  trials  such  as  DFV890  (IFM-2427) (Madurka  et  al.,  2023),  OLT1177  (Marchetti  et  al.,  2018),  Tranilast (Huang et al., 2018), Oridonin (He et al., 2018), Selnoflast (McFarthing et al., 2023) or Inzomelid (IZD174) (Coll et al., 2022), see Table 1 for details. OLT1177 is one of the few NLRP3 inhibitors where the structure

R.M. McManus and E. Latz

Table 1 List of NLRP3 inflammasome inhibitors in clinical trials.

| Name       | Alternative Names                | Company                                           | BBB Penetrant?   | Clinical Trial Completed                                                                                                                                                                                                   | Recruiting                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
|------------|----------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| DFV890     | IFM-2427                         | Novartis Pharmaceuticals                          |                  | NCT04868968, phase 2, FCAS NCT04382053, phase 2, SARS-CoV-2 infected patients with COVID-19 pneumonia                                                                                                                      | NCT04886258, phase 2, knee osteoarthritis NCT06031844, phase 2a, Coronary Heart Disease NCT06097663, phase 2a, Coronary Heart Disease and TET2 or DNMT3A CHIP NCT05552469, phase 1b, patients with myeloid diseases |
| INZOMELID  | IZD174                           | Roche                                             | Yes              | NCT04015076, phase 1, Safety and Tolerability study in healthy and CAPS                                                                                                                                                    |                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| NT-0796    |                                  | NodThera Limited                                  | Yes              | NCT06129409, phase 1/2, Obese Participants at Risk of Cardiovascular Disease                                                                                                                                               |                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| OLT1177    | Dapansutrile                     | Olatec Therapeutics LLC                           | Yes              | NCT02104050, phase 2b, pain associated with osteoarthritis of the knee NCT03534297, phase 1b, Heart Failure                                                                                                                | NCT05658575, phase 2/3, acute gout flare                                                                                                                                                                            |
| Oridonin   |                                  | Wuhan Union Hospital, China                       |                  | NCT05130892, Phase 4, Coronary artery disease with percutaneous coronary intervention                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| RRX-001    |                                  | EpicentRx, Inc.                                   | Yes              | NCT01359982, phase 1, Cancer Subjects NCT02215512, phase 1, Brain Metastases                                                                                                                                               |                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| SELNOFLAST | SOMALIX/RG6418/ IZD334/RO7486967 | Roche                                             |                  | NCT04086602, phase 1, Safety and Tolerability                                                                                                                                                                              | NCT05924243, phase 1b, Parkinson ' s disease                                                                                                                                                                        |
| Tranilast  |                                  | Nuon Therapeutics, Inc. and others                | Yes              | NCT05130892, Phase 4, Coronary artery disease with percutaneous coronary intervention NCT01109121, phase 2, Hyperuricemia and moderate to severe gout NCT00882024, phase 2, Patients With Active Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA) | NCT03923140, phase 2, CAPS                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| VTX2735    |                                  | Ventyx Biosciences, Inc, Zomagen Biosciences, Ltd |                  |                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | NCT05812781, phase 1, CAPS                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| ZYIL1      |                                  | Zydus Lifesciences Limited                        |                  | NCT05186051, phase 2a, CAPS                                                                                                                                                                                                | NCT05981040, phase 2, Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis                                                                                                                                                                 |

has been shared and as OLT1177 reduces the ATPase activity of NLRP3, it  likely  binds  to that region (Marchetti et al., 2018). A recent study found  that  OLT1177  does  not  directly  bind  to  NLRP3  (Teske  et  al., 2024), however, this does not detract from the effectiveness of OLT1177 at preventing the release of active IL-1 β (Marchetti et al., 2018; Tengesdal et al., 2021; Oizumi et al., 2022; Lonnemann et al., 2020) and the promising  findings  from  the  ongoing  clinical  trials  (Table  1).  The structures of most of the compounds are not yet publicly available, thus it is unknown where they precisely bind to prevent NLRP3 inflammasome signalling. However, as some of these inhibitors are in clinical trials for those with Parkinson ' s disease or ALS (Selnoflast and ZYIL1) and  many  compounds are  additionally  BBB  penetrant  (Table  1),  the results of these trials will be of interest to many with strong implications for future treatments of AD.

## 7.4. ASOs or siRNA

An alternative approach to prevent NLRP3 inflammasome signalling has been to reduce the mRNA levels of NLRP3, thus affecting the amount translated  to  protein.  Anti-sense  oligonucleotides  (ASOs)  function  by targeting  a  specific  mRNA  for  degradation  and  SOD1-targeted  ASOs have recently been used in clinical trials to treat Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) (Miller et al., 2022). Interestingly, NLRP3-targeted ASOs were successfully able to reduce the protein levels of NLRP3, thus also significantly reducing NLRP3 inflammasome activation to nigericin and A β stimulation, in both human and murine in vitro models of disease

(Braatz et al., 2023). NLRP3-specific ASOs were also protective in murine models of CAPS, which reduced the production of NLRP3 and active IL-1 β ,  prolonging  the  survival  time  of  these  mice  (Kaufmann  et  al., 2023).

In  a  similar  fashion,  small  interfering  RNA  (siRNA)  also  targets mRNA for  degradation.  Injecting  caspase-1-targeted  siRNA  (under  a AAV) into APP/PS1 mice significantly reduced neuroinflammation and rescued behavioural function in these animals (Han et al., 2020). In vitro , siRNA  targeting  of  caspase-1  and  GSDMD  successfully  reduced  the amount of IL-1 β released  to  the  supernatant  after  A β exposure  (Han et al., 2020), although GSDMD inhibition or depletion has not yet been examined in murine models of AD.

## 7.5. Nanobodies

Camelids (e.g. camels or alpacas) generate single domain antibodies that are derived from heavy chain peptides. They are approx. 15 kDa in size, one tenth that of a conventional antibody. Nanobodies bind with high affinity and specificity, are very stable and due to their small size, they  can  overcome  limitations  posed  by  conventional  antibodies allowing them to bind previously inaccessible epitopes (Wouters et al., 2020). Nanobodies against ASC have been developed, which successfully blocked ASC-CARD  interactions in vitro thus reducing the nigericin-induced cleaved-caspase-1 and active IL-1 β production (Schmidt et al., 2016). In vivo , these ASC-targeted nanobodies were able to  prevent  ASC  prion  activity,  disassemble  ASC  specks  and  were

R.M. McManus and E. Latz protective  against  disease  progression  in  murine  models  of  gout  and arthritis (Bertheloot et al., 2022). GSDMD nanobodies have also been developed that inhibit the formation of GSDMD pores in vitro (Hochheiser et al., 2022b).

To date, nanobodies have largely targeted extracellular components of the inflammasome pathways, due to the challenge of entering the cell. Another challenge that occurs in these approaches for neurodegenerative diseases is that the nanobody would also need to cross the BBB to access the brain parenchyma. Interestingly, brain-penetrant nanobodies have been developed. In this case, Wouters and colleagues developed a nanobody to target the transferrin receptor (that is highly expressed on endothelial cells) and coupled this nanobody to their target of interest, which successfully accessed the CNS after receptor-mediated endocytosis (Wouters et al., 2020). This Trojan-horse like system is a novel way to access the brain and as nanobodies can be readily linked to other nanobodies or peptides (Bannas et al., 2017; Abskharon et al., 2023), their use has the potential to revolutionize therapies in many diseases.

## 8. Conclusions

There is a clinically unmet need to protect against age-related diseases, particularly AD and dementia. As we live in an aging society, this situation is confounded by the number of people who will develop dementia and require enhanced care in the coming years. A key reason for this has been the lack of understanding on the mechanisms that lead to the development of AD, and importantly, the immune mediated aspects. We now know that the NLRP3 inflammasome is triggered by the growing presence of A β and tau in the brain, inducing production of active IL-1 β and ASC specks. This causes a feed-forward inflammatory cycle, where IL-1 β and ASC act on neighbouring brain cells or in the case of ASC, provide  a  platform  to  further  enhance  A β aggregation,  thus  causing physical disruption along with additional DAMP-signals to cells. Under these  inflammatory  conditions,  the  microglial  phagocytic  capacities reduce  (Koenigsknecht-Talboo  and  Landreth,  2005),  which  also  contributes to the worsening pathology.

Preclinical  studies  have  shown  the  benefits  of  preventing  NLRP3 inflammasome signalling, by genetic depletion of NLRP3 components and binding factors or pharmacological inhibition. Indeed there are now a number of approaches under investigation to block this complex, from mRNA-targeted  therapies,  nanobodies  and  novel  small  molecule  inhibitors as discussed in this review. An important factor is that the inhibitors need to reach the brain by crossing the BBB, which adds a layer of complexity that is not required for other NLRP3-mediated diseases. With the recent introduction of A β -targeted therapies, a combination approach with NLRP3 inhibition would be relevant, with the potential to boost the effects of either treatment alone.

## Funding

R.M. is supported by grants from the Alzheimer ' s Forschung Initiative (#20043), Deutsche Demenzhilfe, Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German  Research Foundation) under Germany ' s Excellence Strategy -EXC2151 -390873048 and Project-ID 432325352 -SFB 1454.

E.L. is supported by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) under Germany ' s Excellence Strategy -EXC2151 -390873048 and Project-ID 432325352 -SFB 1454, Helmholtz Association, under the project title ' Immunology &amp; Inflammation ' , #ZT-0027.

## CRediT authorship contribution statement

R ´ oisín M. McManus: Conceptualization, Writing -original draft, Writing -review &amp; editing. Eicke Latz: Conceptualization, Writing -review &amp; editing.

## Declaration of competing interest

E.L.  is  a  Co-founder  and  adviser  at  IFM  Therapeutics,  Dioscure Therapeutics, a 'Stealth ' Biotech and Odyssey Therapeutics. R.M.M. has no competing interests.

## Data availability

No data was used for the research described in the article.

## Acknowledgments

All  figures  were  created using BioRender.com, using their images and parts of schematics.

## References

- Abskharon, R., et al., 2023. Structure-based design of nanobodies that inhibit seeding of Alzheimer ' s patient-extracted tau fibrils. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 120, e2300258120.
- Agostini, L., et al., 2004. NALP3 forms an IL-1beta-processing inflammasome with increased activity in Muckle-Wells autoinflammatory disorder. Immunity 20, 319 -325.
- Akbal, A., et al., 2022. How location and cellular signaling combine to activate the NLRP3 inflammasome. Cell. Mol. Immunol. 19, 1201 -1214.
- Alzheimer, A., Stelzmann, R.A., Schnitzlein, H.N., Murtagh, F.R., 1995. An English translation of Alzheimer ' s 1907 paper, 'Uber eine eigenartige Erkankung der Hirnrinde ' . Clin. Anat. N. Y. N 8, 429 -431.
- Andreeva, L., et al., 2021. NLRP3 cages revealed by full-length mouse NLRP3 structure control pathway activation. Cell 184, 6299 -6312.e22.
- Annus, T., et al., 2016. The pattern of amyloid accumulation in the brains of adults with Down syndrome. Alzheimers Dement. J. Alzheimers Assoc. 12, 538 -545.
- Baik, S.H., et al., 2023. Hexokinase dissociation from mitochondria promotes oligomerization of VDAC that facilitates NLRP3 inflammasome assembly and activation. Sci. Immunol. 8, eade7652.

Bannas, P., Hambach, J., Koch-Nolte, F., 2017. Nanobodies and nanobody-based human heavy chain antibodies as antitumor therapeutics. Front. Immunol. 8, 1603.

- Batista, A.F., et al., 2021. Interleukin-1 β mediates alterations in mitochondrial fusion/ fission proteins and memory impairment induced by amyloidβ oligomers. J. Neuroinflammation 18, 54.
- Bauernfeind, F.G., et al., 2009. Cutting edge: NF-kappaB activating pattern recognition and cytokine receptors license NLRP3 inflammasome activation by regulating NLRP3 expression. J. Immunol. Baltim. Md 1950 183, 787 -791.
- Bellenguez, C., et al., 2022. New insights into the genetic etiology of Alzheimer ' s disease and related dementias. Nat. Genet. 54, 412 -436.
- Bertheloot, D., Latz, E., Franklin, B.S., 2021. Necroptosis, pyroptosis and apoptosis: an intricate game of cell death. Cell. Mol. Immunol. 18, 1106 -1121.
- Bertheloot, D., et al., 2022. Nanobodies dismantle post-pyroptotic ASC specks and counteract inflammation in vivo. EMBO Mol. Med. 14, e15415.
- Bezbradica, J.S., Coll, R.C., Schroder, K., 2017. Sterile signals generate weaker and delayed macrophage NLRP3 inflammasome responses relative to microbial signals. Cell. Mol. Immunol. 14, 118 -126.
- Booshehri, L.M., Hoffman, H.M., 2019. CAPS and NLRP3. J. Clin. Immunol. 39, 277 -286. Bosch-Queralt, M., et al., 2021. Diet-dependent regulation of TGF β impairs reparative innate immune responses after demyelination. Nat. Metab. 3, 211 -227.
- Braatz, C., et al., 2023. NLRP3-directed antisense oligonucleotides reduce microglial immunoactivities in vitro. J. Neurochem. https://doi.org/10.1111/jnc.15778.

Broderick, L., Hoffman, H.M., 2022. IL-1 and autoinflammatory disease: biology, pathogenesis and therapeutic targeting. Nat. Rev. Rheumatol. 18, 448

-

463.

- Budd Haeberlein, S., et al., 2022. Two randomized phase 3 studies of aducanumab in early Alzheimer ' s disease. J. Prev. Alzheimers Dis. 9, 197 -210.
- Butler, C.A., Thornton, P., Brown, G.C., 2021. CD33M inhibits microglial phagocytosis, migration and proliferation, but the Alzheimer ' s disease-protective variant CD33m stimulates phagocytosis and proliferation, and inhibits adhesion. J. Neurochem. 158, 297 -310.
- Coll, R.C., et al., 2015. A small-molecule inhibitor of the NLRP3 inflammasome for the treatment of inflammatory diseases. Nat. Med. 21, 248 -255.
- Coll, R.C., et al., 2019. MCC950 directly targets the NLRP3 ATP-hydrolysis motif for inflammasome inhibition. Nat. Chem. Biol. 15, 556 -559.
- Coll, R.C., Schroder, K., Pelegrín, P., 2022. NLRP3 and pyroptosis blockers for treating inflammatory diseases. Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 43, 653 -668.
- Cross, R., 2020. Could an NLRP3 inhibitor be the one drug to conquer common diseases? Chem. Eng. News 98 (7). https://cen.acs.org/pharmaceuticals/drug-discovery/Coul d-an-NLRP3-inhibitor-be-the-one-drug-to-conquer-common-diseases/98/i7.
- Dempsey, C., et al., 2017. Inhibiting the NLRP3 inflammasome with MCC950 promotes non-phlogistic clearance of amyloidβ and cognitive function in APP/PS1 mice. Brain Behav. Immun. 61, 306 -316.
- Depp, C., et al., 2023. Myelin dysfunction drives amyloidβ deposition in models of Alzheimer ' s disease. Nature 618, 349 -357.
- Dubois, E.A., Rissmann, R., Cohen, A.F., 2011. Rilonacept and canakinumab. Br. J. Clin. Pharmacol. 71, 639 -641.

R.M. McManus and E. Latz

- Duewell, P., et al., 2010. NLRP3 inflammasomes are required for atherogenesis and activated by cholesterol crystals. Nature 464, 1357 -1361.
- Fernandes-Alnemri, T., et al., 2007. The pyroptosome: a supramolecular assembly of ASC dimers mediating inflammatory cell death via caspase-1 activation. Cell Death Differ. 14, 1590 -1604.
- Finneran, D.J., Nash, K.R., 2019. Neuroinflammation and fractalkine signaling in Alzheimer ' s disease. J. Neuroinflammation 16, 30.
- Flores, J., et al., 2018. Caspase-1 inhibition alleviates cognitive impairment and neuropathology in an Alzheimer ' s disease mouse model. Nat. Commun. 9, 3916.
- Flores, J., Fillion, M.-L., LeBlanc, A.C., 2022. Caspase-1 inhibition improves cognition without significantly altering amyloid and inflammation in aged Alzheimer disease mice. Cell Death Dis. 13, 864.
- Forner, S., et al., 2021. Systematic phenotyping and characterization of the 5xFAD mouse model of Alzheimer ' s disease. Sci. Data 8, 270.
- Franklin, B.S., et al., 2014. The adaptor ASC has extracellular and 'prionoid ' activities that propagate inflammation. Nat. Immunol. 15, 727 -737.
- Friker, L.L., et al., 2020. β -Amyloid clustering around ASC fibrils boosts its toxicity in microglia. Cell Rep. 30, 3743 -3754.e6.
- Fu, J., Wu, H., 2023. Structural mechanisms of NLRP3 inflammasome assembly and activation. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 41, 301 -316.
- Gaidt, M.M., et al., 2016. Human monocytes engage an alternative inflammasome pathway. Immunity 44, 833 -846.
- Goldberg, E.L., et al., 2017. β -Hydroxybutyrate deactivates neutrophil NLRP3 inflammasome to relieve gout flares. Cell Rep. 18, 2077 -2087.
- Gritsenko, A., et al., 2020. Priming is dispensable for NLRP3 inflammasome activation in human monocytes in vitro. Front. Immunol. 11, 565924.
- Halle, A., et al., 2008. The NALP3 inflammasome is involved in the innate immune response to amyloid-beta. Nat. Immunol. 9, 857 -865.
- Han, C., et al., 2020. New mechanism of nerve injury in Alzheimer ' s disease: β -amyloidinduced neuronal pyroptosis. J. Cell Mol. Med. 24, 8078 -8090.
- He, W., et al., 2015. Gasdermin D is an executor of pyroptosis and required for interleukin-1 β secretion. Cell Res. 25, 1285 -1298.
- He, H., et al., 2018. Oridonin is a covalent NLRP3 inhibitor with strong antiinflammasome activity. Nat. Commun. 9, 2550.
- Heneka, M.T., et al., 2013. NLRP3 is activated in Alzheimer ' s disease and contributes to pathology in APP/PS1 mice. Nature 493, 674 -678.
- Heneka, M.T., McManus, R.M., Latz, E., 2018. Inflammasome signalling in brain function and neurodegenerative disease. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 19, 610 -621.
- Hochheiser, I.V., et al., 2022a. Structure of the NLRP3 decamer bound to the cytokine release inhibitor CRID3. Nature 604, 184 -189.

Hochheiser, I.V., et al., 2022b. Directionality of PYD filament growth determined by the transition of NLRP3 nucleation seeds to ASC elongation. Sci. Adv. 8, eabn7583.

- Huang, Y., et al., 2018. Tranilast directly targets NLRP3 to treat inflammasome-driven diseases. EMBO Mol. Med. 10, e8689.
- Ising, C., et al., 2019. NLRP3 inflammasome activation drives tau pathology. Nature 575, 669 -673.
- Ittner, L.M., G ¨ otz, J., 2011. Amyloidβ and tau-a toxic pas de deux in Alzheimer ' s disease. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 12, 65 -72.
- Jack, C.R., et al., 2010. Hypothetical model of dynamic biomarkers of the Alzheimer ' s pathological cascade. Lancet Neurol. 9, 119 -128.
- Janeway, C.A., Medzhitov, R., 2002. Innate immune recognition. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 20, 197 -216.
- Kaufmann, B., et al., 2023. Antisense oligonucleotide therapy decreases IL-1 β expression and prolongs survival in mutant Nlrp3 mice. J. Immunol. Baltim. Md 1950 211, 287 -294.
- Kitazawa, M., et al., 2011. Blocking IL-1 signaling rescues cognition, attenuates tau pathology, and restores neuronal β -catenin pathway function in an Alzheimer ' s disease model. J. Immunol. Baltim. Md 1950 187, 6539 -6549.
- Koenigsknecht-Talboo, J., Landreth, G.E., 2005. Microglial phagocytosis induced by fibrillar beta-amyloid and IgGs are differentially regulated by proinflammatory cytokines. J. Neurosci. Off. J. Soc. Neurosci. 25, 8240 -8249.
- Koepsell, T.D., Monsell, S.E., 2012. Reversion from mild cognitive impairment to normal or near-normal cognition: risk factors and prognosis. Neurology 79, 1591 -1598.
- Kumar, B.V., Connors, T., Farber, D.L., 2018. Human T cell development, localization, and function throughout life. Immunity 48, 202 -213.
- Liang, J.J., Fraser, I.D.C., Bryant, C.E., 2021. Lipid regulation of NLRP3 inflammasome activity through organelle stress. Trends Immunol. 42, 807 -823.
- Linse, S., et al., 2020. Kinetic fingerprints differentiate the mechanisms of action of anti-
- A β antibodies. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 27, 1125 -1133.
- Lonnemann, N., et al., 2020. The NLRP3 inflammasome inhibitor OLT1177 rescues cognitive impairment in a mouse model of Alzheimer ' s disease. PNAS 117 (50), 32145 -32154. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2009680117. Epub 2020 Nov 30.
- Lopez, O.L., 2013. Mild cognitive impairment. Contin. Lifelong Learn. Neurol. 19, 411 -424.
- Lu ˇ ci ¯ unait ˙ e, A., et al., 2020. Soluble A β oligomers and protofibrils induce NLRP3 inflammasome activation in microglia. J. Neurochem. 155, 650 -661.
- Madurka, I., et al., 2023. DFV890: a new oral NLRP3 inhibitor-tested in an early phase 2a randomised clinical trial in patients with COVID-19 pneumonia and impaired respiratory function. Infection 51, 641 -654.
- Man, S.M., Karki, R., Kanneganti, T.-D., 2017. Molecular mechanisms and functions of pyroptosis, inflammatory caspases and inflammasomes in infectious diseases. Immunol. Rev. 277, 61 -75.
- Mangan, M.S.J., et al., 2018. Targeting the NLRP3 inflammasome in inflammatory diseases. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 17, 588 -606.
- Manich, G., et al., 2019. Role of the cd200-cd200r Axis during homeostasis and neuroinflammation. Neuroscience 405, 118 -136.
- Marchetti, C., et al., 2018. OLT1177, a β -sulfonyl nitrile compound, safe in humans, inhibits the NLRP3 inflammasome and reverses the metabolic cost of inflammation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 115, E1530 -E1539.
- Mariathasan, S., et al., 2006. Cryopyrin activates the inflammasome in response to toxins and ATP. Nature 440, 228 -232.
- Martinon, F., Burns, K., Tschopp, J., 2002. The inflammasome: a molecular platform triggering activation of inflammatory caspases and processing of proIL-beta. Mol. Cell 10, 417 -426.
- Martinon, F., P ´ etrilli, V., Mayor, A., Tardivel, A., Tschopp, J., 2006. Gout-associated uric acid crystals activate the NALP3 inflammasome. Nature 440, 237 -241.
- Mauri, M., Sinforiani, E., Zucchella, C., Cuzzoni, M.G., Bono, G., 2012. Progression to dementia in a population with amnestic mild cognitive impairment: clinical variables associated with conversion. Funct. Neurol. 27, 49 -54.
- McFarthing, K., et al., 2023. Parkinson ' s disease drug therapies in the clinical trial pipeline: 2023 update. J. Park. Dis. 13, 427 -439.
- McManus, R.M., 2022. The role of immunity in Alzheimer ' s disease. Adv. Biol. 6, e2101166.
- McManus, R.M., Higgins, S.C., Mills, K.H.G., Lynch, M.A., 2014. Respiratory infection promotes T cell infiltration and amyloidβ deposition in APP/PS1 mice. Neurobiol. Aging 35, 109 -121.
- McManus, R., et al., 2022. NLRP3-Mediated glutaminolysis regulates microglia in Alzheimer ' s disease. SSRN Scholarly. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4178538. Paper at.
- Meng, J.X., et al., 2022. Hyperphosphorylated tau self-assembles into amorphous aggregates eliciting TLR4-dependent responses. Nat. Commun. 13, 2692.
- Mertens, M., Singh, J.A., 2009. Anakinra for rheumatoid arthritis: a systematic review. J. Rheumatol. 36, 1118 -1125.
- Miller, L.S., et al., 2006. MyD88 mediates neutrophil recruitment initiated by IL-1R but not TLR2 activation in immunity against Staphylococcus aureus. Immunity 24, 79 -91.
- Miller, T.M., et al., 2022. Trial of antisense oligonucleotide tofersen for SOD1 ALS. N. Engl. J. Med. 387, 1099 -1110.
- Mintun, M.A., et al., 2021. Donanemab in early Alzheimer ' s disease. N. Engl. J. Med. 384, 1691 -1704.
- Misawa, T., et al., 2013. Microtubule-driven spatial arrangement of mitochondria promotes activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome. Nat. Immunol. 14, 454 -460.
- Monteleone, M., et al., 2018. Interleukin-1 β maturation triggers its relocation to the plasma membrane for gasdermin-D-dependent and -independent secretion. Cell Rep. 24, 1425 -1433.
- Mormino, E.C., Papp, K.V., 2018. Amyloid accumulation and cognitive decline in clinically normal older individuals: implications for aging and early Alzheimer ' s disease. J. Alzheimers Dis. JAD 64, S633 -S646.
- Mufson, E.J., Counts, S.E., Perez, S.E., Ginsberg, S.D., 2008. Cholinergic system during the progression of Alzheimer ' s disease: therapeutic implications. Expert Rev. Neurother. 8, 1703 -1718.
- Mu ˜ noz-Planillo, R., et al., 2013. K + efflux is the common trigger of NLRP3 inflammasome activation by bacterial toxins and particulate matter. Immunity 38, 1142 -1153.
- Naj, A.C., et al., 2011. Common variants at MS4A4/MS4A6E, CD2AP, CD33 and EPHA1 are associated with late-onset Alzheimer ' s disease. Nat. Genet. 43, 436 -441.
- Oizumi, T., et al., 2022. NLRP3 inflammasome inhibitor OLT1177 suppresses onset of inflammation in mice with dextran sulfate sodium-induced colitis. Dig. Dis. Sci. 67 (7), 2912 -2921. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10620-021-07184-y.
- Ojala, J., et al., 2009. Expression of interleukin-18 is increased in the brains of
- Alzheimer ' s disease patients. Neurobiol. Aging 30, 198 -209.
- Petersen, R.C., 2016. Mild cognitive impairment. Contin. Minneap. Minn 22, 404 -418. Primiano, M.J., et al., 2016. Efficacy and pharmacology of the NLRP3 inflammasome inhibitor CP-456,773 (CRID3) in murine models of dermal and pulmonary inflammation. J. Immunol. Baltim. Md 1950 197, 2421 -2433.
- Rajan, K.B., et al., 2021. Population estimate of people with clinical Alzheimer ' s disease and mild cognitive impairment in the United States (2020-2060). Alzheimers Dement. J. Alzheimers Assoc. 17, 1966 -1975.
- Rajmohan, R., Reddy, P.H., 2017. Amyloid-beta and phosphorylated tau accumulations cause abnormalities at synapses of Alzheimer ' s disease neurons. J. Alzheimers Dis. JAD 57, 975 -999.
- Rashidi, M., et al., 2019. The pyroptotic cell death effector gasdermin D is activated by gout-associated uric acid crystals but is dispensable for cell death and IL-1 β release. J. Immunol. Baltim. Md 1950 203, 736 -748.
- Ries, M., Sastre, M., 2016. Mechanisms of A β clearance and degradation by glial cells. Front. Aging Neurosci. 8, 160.
- Ryu, J.K., McLarnon, J.G., 2009. A leaky blood-brain barrier, fibrinogen infiltration and microglial reactivity in inflamed Alzheimer ' s disease brain. J. Cell Mol. Med. 13, 2911 -2925.
- Sadik, C.D., Kim, N.D., Luster, A.D., 2011. Neutrophils cascading their way to inflammation. Trends Immunol. 32, 452 -460.
- Salloway, S., et al., 2022. Amyloid-related imaging abnormalities in 2 phase 3 studies evaluating aducanumab in patients with early alzheimer disease. JAMA Neurol. 79, 13 -21.
- Saresella, M., et al., 2016. The NLRP3 and NLRP1 inflammasomes are activated in Alzheimer ' s disease. Mol. Neurodegener. 11, 23.
- Schmidt, F.I., et al., 2016. A single domain antibody fragment that recognizes the adaptor ASC defines the role of ASC domains in inflammasome assembly. J. Exp. Med. 213, 771 -790.
- Sevigny, J., et al., 2016. The antibody aducanumab reduces A β plaques in Alzheimer ' s disease. Nature 537, 50 -56.

R.M. McManus and E. Latz

- Sheedy, F.J., et al., 2013. CD36 coordinates NLRP3 inflammasome activation by facilitating intracellular nucleation of soluble ligands into particulate ligands in sterile inflammation. Nat. Immunol. 14, 812 -820.
- Shen, H., et al., 2021. Pyroptosis executive protein GSDMD as a biomarker for diagnosis and identification of Alzheimer ' s disease. Brain Behav 11, e02063.
- Sims, J.R., et al., 2023. Donanemab in early symptomatic alzheimer disease: the TRAILBLAZER-ALZ 2 randomized clinical trial. JAMA 330, 512 -527.
- Sj ¨ ostr ¨ om, E.O., et al., 2021. Transport study of interleukin-1 inhibitors using a human in vitro model of the blood-brain barrier. Brain Behav. Immun. - Health 16, 100307.
- Spina, S., et al., 2021. Comorbid neuropathological diagnoses in early versus late-onset Alzheimer ' s disease. Brain J. Neurol. 144, 2186 -2198.
- Srinivasan, S., et al., 2024. Inflammasome signaling is dispensable for ß -amyloid-induced neuropathology in preclinical models of Alzheimer ' s disease. Front. Immunol. 15, 1323409.
- Stancu, I.-C., et al., 2019. Aggregated Tau activates NLRP3-ASC inflammasome exacerbating exogenously seeded and non-exogenously seeded Tau pathology in vivo. Acta Neuropathol. 137, 599 -617.
- Sutinen, E.M., Pirttil ¨ a, T., Anderson, G., Salminen, A., Ojala, J.O., 2012. Proinflammatory interleukin-18 increases Alzheimer ' s disease-associated amyloidβ production in human neuron-like cells. J. Neuroinflammation 9, 199.
- Swanson, C.J., et al., 2021. A randomized, double-blind, phase 2b proof-of-concept clinical trial in early Alzheimer ' s disease with lecanemab, an anti-A β protofibril antibody. Alzheimer ' s Res. Ther. 13, 80.
- Takeda, K., Kaisho, T., Akira, S., 2003. Toll-like receptors. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 21, 335 -376.
- Tanzi, R.E., 2012. The genetics of alzheimer disease. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Med. 2, a006296.
- Tcw, J., Goate, A.M., 2017. Genetics of β -amyloid precursor protein in Alzheimer ' s disease. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Med. 7, a024539.
- Tengesdal, I.W., et al., 2021. Targeting tumor-derived NLRP3 reduces melanoma progression by limiting MDSCs expansion. PNAS 118 (10), e2000915118. https:// doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2000915118.
- Teske, K.A., et al., 2024. Interrogating direct NLRP3 engagement and functional inflammasome inhibition using cellular assays. Cell Chem. Biol. 31, 349 -360.e6.
- Torres, S., et al., 2021. The specific NLRP3 antagonist IFM-514 decreases fibrosis and inflammation in experimental murine non-alcoholic steatohepatitis. Front. Mol. Biosci. 8, 715765.
- Ulrich, J.D., et al., 2014. Altered microglial response to A β plaques in APPPS1-21 mice heterozygous for TREM2. Mol. Neurodegener. 9, 20.
- van Dyck, C.H., et al., 2023. Lecanemab in early Alzheimer ' s disease. N. Engl. J. Med. 388, 9 -21.
- Venegas, C., et al., 2017. Microglia-derived ASC specks cross-seed amyloidβ in Alzheimer ' s disease. Nature 552, 355 -361.
- Villemagne, V.L., et al., 2013. Amyloid β deposition, neurodegeneration, and cognitive decline in sporadic Alzheimer ' s disease: a prospective cohort study. Lancet Neurol. 12, 357 -367.
- Wang, X., et al., 2021. NLRP3 inflammasome inhibitor CY-09 reduces hepatic steatosis in experimental NAFLD mice. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 534, 734 -739.
- Wilson, R.S., Leurgans, S.E., Boyle, P.A., Bennett, D.A., 2011. Cognitive decline in prodromal alzheimer disease and mild cognitive impairment. Arch. Neurol. 68.
- Wolf, A.J., et al., 2016. Hexokinase is an innate immune receptor for the detection of bacterial peptidoglycan. Cell 166, 624 -636.
- Wouters, Y., Jaspers, T., De Strooper, B., Dewilde, M., 2020. Identification and in vivo characterization of a brain-penetrating nanobody. Fluids Barriers CNS 17, 62.
- Xiao, L., Magupalli, V.G., Wu, H., 2023. Cryo-EM structures of the active NLRP3 inflammasome disc. Nature 613, 595 -600.
- Y, H., My, Z., D, Y., B, M., G, N., 2016. NEK7 is an essential mediator of NLRP3 activation downstream of potassium efflux. Nature 530.
- Zhang, X., et al., 2020. Oligodendroglial glycolytic stress triggers inflammasome activation and neuropathology in Alzheimer ' s disease. Sci. Adv. 6, eabb8680.
- Zheng, D., Liwinski, T., Elinav, E., 2020. Inflammasome activation and regulation: toward a better understanding of complex mechanisms. Cell Discov 6, 36.
- Zhou, B., Abbott, D.W., 2021. Gasdermin E permits interleukin-1 beta release in distinct sublytic and pyroptotic phases. Cell Rep. 35, 108998.
- Zolochevska, O., Taglialatela, G., 2016. Non-demented individuals with Alzheimer ' s disease neuropathology: resistance to cognitive decline may reveal new treatment strategies. Curr. Pharm. Des. 22, 4063 -4068.